1

CHEST

ACUTE SHORTNESS OF BREATH (DYSPNOEA) Clinical Overview Dyspnoea is a
subjective feeling of difficulty in breathing. Children or parents may
describe dyspnoea as ‘getting easily tired’ or ‘can’t keep up with other
kids’. It may occur spontaneously or during certain activities such as
exercise or during feeding in infants. Dyspnoea is a common symptom of a
variety of cardio-pulmonary diseases. Respiratory diseases, such as
asthma, remain the most common reason for dyspnoea. In older children,
psychological factors can contribute to the sensation of dyspnoea.
Congestive cardiac failure (CCF) is an important cause of dyspnoea at
any age of childhood. Children presenting with dyspnoea usually have
other symptoms and signs of respiratory distress syndrome, including
tachypnoea, subcostal recession, tachycardia and chest tightness. The
term may also include ‘unusual pattern of breathing’. For example,
hyperpnoea, which occurs in metabolic acidosis, such as diabetic
ketoacidosis, may also give a sensation of dyspnoea.

Possible Diagnoses Onset in Infants

Children

Common Respiratory distress syndrome Transient tachypnoea Viral-induced
wheeze Bronchiolitis CCF

Asthma Viral-induced wheeze Pneumonia CCF Psychogenic

Rare Pulmonary oedema Pneumonia Pneumothorax Persistent pulmonary
hypertension Pleural effusion Pulmonary hypoplasia Pericardial tamponade

Pulmonary oedema Obstructive airway diseases Pulmonary embolism Inhaled
foreign body Chronic lung disease Neuromuscular disease (e.g. myasthenia
gravis) Hyperventilation Pulmonary embolism

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance Grunting Tachypnoea Wheeze Fever
Reduced peak flow

Asthma

Viral-Induced

Pneumonia

Cardiac Failure

Psychogenic

No Yes Yes Possible Yes

No Yes Yes Possible Possible

Yes Yes No Yes Possible

No Yes Possible No Possible

No No No No No

1

2

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

Recommended Investigations Oxygen saturation monitoring (oximetry), peak
flow measurements and, in severe cases, the following: *** *** *** ***

Blood gas measurements are essential frontline investigations Lung
function tests can differentiate between obstructive and restrictive
causes of dyspnoea A chest X-ray may show hyperinflation (asthma);
consolidation (pneumonia); pneumothorax Echocardiography and
electrocardiogram (ECG) in patients with suspected heart disease

Top Tips • A clear distinction between bronchiolitis and bronchitis in
the first 2 years of life is difficult and is of no therapeutic
significance. • The history of a child with shortness of breath is
incomplete without asking about symptoms associated with activities such
as running or bike riding or exposure to cooler weather. • Dyspnoea
during exercise is frequently caused by asthma. Peak flow measurements
before and after the exercise help to establish the diagnosis. Observing
the child using the inhaler is essential. • Wheezing is not a symptom of
pneumonia, while grunting with flaring of alae nasi is a symptom. • The
differentiation between cardiac and pulmonary causes of dyspnoea can be
difficult. The presence of a murmur, liver enlargement and relative
tachycardia favour cardiac causes. • An aid to differentiate cardiac
from pulmonary dyspnoea is the hyperbaric oxygen test by breathing 100%.
In pulmonary diseases there will be a normalisation of the oxygen
saturation. • The question whether to admit a child with asthma can be
difficult. If oxygen saturation in air is greater than 95% and peak flow
measurement greater than 70% of the expected, he/ she can be managed
with medications at home. • Regular physical activity by a child with
asthma is associated with an improvement of disease control and life
quality. Parents often restrain their asthmatic children from engaging
in physical activity for unfounded fear of asthma exacerbation. • When
an adolescent presents with hyperventilation, ask about other
psychosomatic complaints, e.g. any problem with swallowing difficulty
suggestive of ‘globus hystericus’.

Red Flags • An asthmatic child who suddenly becomes dyspnoeic, with
retrosternal pain, may not always have exacerbation of asthma.
Pneumothorax or pneumomediastinum should be considered.
Pneumomediastinum is caused by alveolar rupture, leading to air
infiltration along the bronchiolar sheath with air reaching the
mediastinum. Computed tomography (CT) scan is the golden standard to
diagnose it. • An infant with no murmur detected at birth but a murmur
at the age of 6 weeks is likely to be due to ventricular septal defect
(VSD). This infant may soon develop CCF if the VSD is large. • Asthma
can have some shadows in the chest X-ray; these do not indicate
pneumonia and will disappear with anti-asthmatic treatment, and
antibiotics are not indicated. • An infant with prolonged feeding time,
who requires rest periods during feeding, or who displays breathlessness
while feeding can have an underlying cardiac failure. • Remember that
oxygen saturations represent the oxygenated haemoglobin (Hb) to the
total Hb, so oxygen saturation can still be normal in the presence of
anaemia or carbon monoxide poisoning.

FURTHER READING McCarter T. Asthma – The national surveillance data and
the national asthma education and prevention program’s expert panel
report 3. Am Health Drug Benefits 2008;1(2):35–50.

3

Chest

BREAST ENLARGEMENT IN BOYS (GYNAECOMASTIA) Clinical Overview
Gynaecomastia is the most common disease of the male breast. It is
defined as a benign diffuse enlargement of the breast due to the
presence of mammary tissue, mainly glandular proliferation, in the male.
It is the result of oestrogen-androgen imbalance (whether an increase in
oestrogen production, a relative decrease of testosterone production or
a combination of both). In the male, androgens are important in
inhibiting stimulatory oestrogenic effects on breast tissue.
Gynaecomastia has two peaks: in the neonatal period, with an occurrence
of 60%–90% of babies, and a second peak occurring at puberty which is a
common condition affecting the majority of male children and regressing
spontaneously in 12–18 months. This type of gynaecomastia needs to be
differentiated from obesity-related breast enlargement
(pseudo-gynaecomastia), which is composed of adipose tissue (and not
glandular tissue), medication-induced gynaecomastia, familial
gynaecomastia and local lesions inside the breast such as tumour.

Possible Diagnoses Infants

Children

Common Physiologic (maternal hormones) Infection

Puberty (about two-thirds of all boys) Drugs (exposure to oestrogen)
Familial gynaecomastia (autosomal dominant) Klinefelter’s syndrome
Obesity

Rare Benign mass (lipoma, cysts, haematoma) Testicular failure Growth
hormone therapy Neurofibromatosis Congenital adrenogenital
(11ß-hydroxylase deficiency) Adrenal tumour (feminising tumour)
Hypogonadism and cryptorchidism Testicular tumour (Leydig cell tumour,
usually benign) Hyperthyroidism Prolactinoma Liver tumours Liver
cirrhosis Chronic renal failure Peutz–Jeghers’ syndrome
McCune–Albright’s syndrome Breast carcinoma Androgen insensitivity
syndrome Reifenstein’s syndrome (hypogonadism)

4

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance Learning difficulty Hypogonadism
Unilateral Noted at puberty Spontaneous resolution

Puberty

Drugs

Familial

Klinefelter Syndrome

Obesity

No No Possible Yes Yes

No No Possible No No

No No Possible No No

Yes Yes Possible Yes No

No No No No Possible

Recommended Investigations In most cases, tests are not necessary. Some
cases may need the following: ** ** ** ** ** ** ** **

Thyroid function tests to assess thyroid function Testosterone level for
suspected hypogonadism Chromosomal analysis if Klinefelter’s syndrome
suspected 17-hydroxyprogesterone and other tests for congenital
adrenogenital syndrome Ultrasound scan for breast evaluation (breast
mass, renal and testicular tumours) Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) for
cerebral lesions (e.g. prolactinoma) Mammography to evaluate true
gynaecomastia from benign or malignant tumours Biopsy for suspected
testicular tumours

Top Tips • Enlargement of the breasts occurs in most male and female
neonates as a result of stimulation by maternal hormones. Spontaneous
regression is the rule. Their families need to be reassured. • During
puberty, up to two-thirds of boys develop gynaecomastia that may be
unilateral and tender. It usually begins at age 10–12 years and peaks at
age 13–14 years, and regression is usual within 18 months. • In
gynaecomastia, a firm or rubbery mass of tissue can be felt extending
symmetrically from the nipple. In obese boys the breasts are enlarged
due to fat tissue accumulation (pseudo-gynaecomastia), without the
characteristic rubbery consistency. Because of the increasing incidence
of obesity, pseudo-gynaecomastia is increasing. • The mean hormonal
concentrations of follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), luteinising
hormone (LH), prolactin, testosterone and eostradiol in boys with
gynaecomastia are the same as in boys without it. • Drugs inducing
gynaecomastia include ketoconazole, spironolactone, digoxin, methyldopa,
marijuana and anti-ulcer (e.g. omeprazole) and antiretroviral drugs.
They should be discontinued whenever possible. In a month after
discontinuation, gynaecomastia should have regressed. • Surgical removal
of the enlarged breast is rarely indicated except for marked enlargement
that has caused emotional stress to the child.

Red Flags • In neonatal gynaecomastia, discharge from the nipple
(colostrums) should not be squeezed or pressed to avoid infection.
Although it usually regresses within 2–3 weeks of age, in some cases
enlargement continues up to 6 months of age.

Chest

5

• In contrast to the common occurrence of pubertal gynaecomastia,
pre-pubertal gynaecomastia is rare but often unrecognised. Although the
majority of them are idiopathic, it could be a sign of serious
underlying disorders. Full evaluation is required. • In any child with
gynaecomastia, effort should be made to exclude exposure to oestrogen,
accidental or therapeutic. Increased pigmentation of the nipple and
areola is an important clue. • Gynaecomastia associated with
neurological manifestations such as headaches and/or visual disturbance
could be caused by pituitary tumour. A cranial MRI is urgently required.
• In a child with gynaecomastia, testes should be examined to exclude
tumour or testicular failure. • Any gynaecomastia with galactorrhoea
(spontaneous flow of milk) may suggest the presence of prolactinoma as
an underlying pathology; an urgent serum prolactin and cranial MRI are
required. • Gynaecomastia can later become fibrotic, firm, sometimes
hard, and has to be differentiated from breast cancer, which is rare and
accounts for less than 1% of cancers in men. Red flags include
unilateral mass that is hard, fixed, peripheral to the nipple or
associated with nipple discharge, skin changes or lymphadenopathy. •
Klinefelter’s syndrome is common (1:500–1,000 of newborn males, making
it the most common chromosomal aberration) and is associated with
gynaecomastia in 80% of cases; the risk of breast cancer is 16 times
higher than in other men. Monitoring the gynaecomastia is important.

FURTHER READING Cuhaci N, Polaf SB, Evranos B et al. Gynecomastia:
Clinical evaluation and management. Indian J Endocrinol
2014;18(2):150–158.

6

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

BREAST LUMPS Clinical Overview Breast development normally occurs in
girls aged 8½ to 13½ years in five stages; development is not completed
until late teens and early twenties. The vast majority of breast masses
in children are usually benign and self-limited. Neonatal bilateral
breast hypertrophy due to maternal hormonal influence is a very common
finding in both sexes. Breast buds and thelarche may occur in female
toddlers; the condition is usually benign if it occurs in isolation.
Nonetheless, a lump in the breast is an alarming sign because parents
associate any breast swelling with cancer. A thorough history and
physical examination, sometimes requiring needle aspiration and biopsy,
are essential in any child who has a mass in the breast.

Possible Diagnoses Infants

Children

Common Bilateral breast enlargement Mastitis/abscess Haemangioma Injury
to the breast

Thelarche (including premature thelarche) Breast buds Precocious puberty
cyst Benign tumour (e.g. fibroadenoma haemangioma) Breast engorgement

Rare Trauma Drugs (oestrogen, systemic or topical) Intramammary lymph
node Malignant tumours (rhabdomyosarcoma, non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma,
metastatic neuroblastoma) Virginal hypertrophy (macromastia) Fibrocystic
(mammary dysplasia) Lipoma Fat necrosis Macromastia

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance Often unilateral Adrenarche present
Growth spurt Isolated round mass May affect toddlers

Thelarche

Breast Buds

Precocious Puberty

Benign Tumour

Yes No No No Yes

Yes No Yes Yes Yes

Possible Yes Yes No Yes

Yes No Possible Yes Possible

Breast Engorgement Possible No Yes Yes No

Recommended Investigations *** Ultrasound scan to diagnose breast
masses, e.g. a cyst or normal thelarche with normal tissue *** Pelvic
ultrasonography for precocious puberty in girls

7

Chest

* ** *** \*** **

Fine-needle aspiration and guided biopsy are essential for evaluation of
breast masses Hormonal assay in blood (LH, FSH, sex hormones) for cases
with precocious puberty Cranial MRI may demonstrate a CNS abnormality in
children with precious puberty Wrist X-ray for bone age to assess
osseous maturation for cases of precocious puberty

Top Tips • Premature breast development (thelarche) is defined as an
isolated breast enlargement in girls before the age of 7 years.
Precocious puberty in girls is defined by the presence of other puberty
signs (pubic and/or axillary hair, growth spurt) before the age of 8
years in girls and before the age of 9 years in boys. • Fibroadenoma,
the most frequent breast tumour, occurs mostly in adolescents, which is
usually solitary and benign. • Breast trauma is common, resulting often
from contact sport. Haematoma, contusion and fat necrosis may occur. The
latter results from cystic changes or fibrosis within the breast. •
Painful engorgement of the breast (mastodynia) occurs physiologically in
association with ovulatory cycles and pathologically in lactating
mothers. • In contrast to adults, mammography is not used in paediatrics
because of the extremely low incidence of cancer and the risk of
radiation, and because the dense breast tissue of adolescents obstructs
adequate visualisation.

Red Flags • Breast buds (stage 2 of breast development) heralding
puberty in girls may be tender on palpation; this does not suggest
inflammation. • Although premature thelarche is a benign condition
starting as early as under 1 year of age, thorough examination of the
child is essential to ensure there are no signs of precocious puberty or
pigmentation. • The vast majority of breast masses can be diagnosed
clinically or with the help of ultrasound scan. Only occasionally is
fine-needle aspiration biopsy required; surgery is best avoided to
prevent deformity. • If cysts are suspected, these often vary in size in
relation to the menstrual cycle, so a patient should be re-examined 2
weeks after the initial examination. • Remember that a relapse of acute
lymphoblastic leukaemia may present as a breast lump. • Although
malignant tumours are rare in children, their incidence is 2%–3% of all
breast masses in adolescent girls. Early menarche in association
anovulatory cycles is a risk factor. • A breast cancer is recognised by
its rapid growth; it is hard and not freely mobile. Changes of the
overlying skin including ulceration and nipple discharges are worrying
signs.

FURTHER READING Kennedy RD, Boughey JC. Management of paediatric and
adolescent breast masses. Semin Plast Surg 2013;27(1):19–22.

8

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

CHEST PAIN Clinical Overview Chest pain is a common complaint in
children. It is the second most frequent cause of referral to paediatric
cardiologists after cardiac murmur. Although chest pain in adults is
considered a medical emergency because of possible associated heart
attack, the overwhelming majority of children have a non-cardiac
aetiology. The most common causes of chest pain include idiopathic,
injury, musculoskeletal myalgia, pulmonary diseases (e.g. asthma),
cardiac, gastrointestinal disorders and psychogenic causes. Many
teenagers present with psychogenic chest pain, often with
hyperventilation, reflecting anxiety generated by some events. Other
teenagers have chest pain because of benign transient intercostal muscle
spasm. Chest pain can be acute or chronic, which lasts by definition
longer than 6 months. Although chronic or recurrent chest pain is likely
to be benign (mostly caused by anxiety), this complaint often leads to
numerous school absences, restriction of normal activities and
considerable worry for patients and their parents.

Possible Diagnoses Infants

Children

Common Inflammatory changes (cellulitis) Child abuse (e.g. rib fracture)
Trauma/injury Pneumonia Chest drain (therapeutic)

Idiopathic Psychogenic (anxiety or stress) Costochondritis Direct trauma
to the chest Pulmonary (pneumonia, asthma, pleurisy)

Rare Acute chest syndrome (sickle-cell anaemia \[SCA\]) Anomalous origin
of the coronary arteries Kawasaki’s disease Scurvy

Acid reflux Myositis (such as dermatomyositis) Ischaemic heart disease
(e.g. Kawasaki’s disease) Marfan’s syndrome (because of dissecting
aortic aneurysm) Cardiac (e.g. aortic stenosis, pericarditis) SCA
(causing ischaemic chest pain) Bornholm’s disease Herpes zoster

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance Abnormal physical findings Previous
episodes &gt;10 years of age Antecedent viral upper respiratory tract
infection (URTI) Localised (non-diffuse)

Idiopathic

Psychogenic

Costochondritis

Trauma

Pulmonary

No Possible Possible

No Yes Yes

Yes No No

Possible No No

Yes Possible No

No

No

Yes

No

Possible

Yes

No

Yes

Possible

Possible

Recommended Investigations \*\* Full blood count (FBC) may show anaemia
in SCA \*\* Chest X-ray for cases of pericarditis, pneumonia, chest
syndrome for SCA

Chest

9

\*\*\* ECG and 24-hour ECG monitoring if cardiac cases \*\* Exercise
stress test for suspected cardiac diseases \*\*\* Echocardiography for
suspected cardiac disease \*\*  Endoscopy if a gastric source of the
pain is suspected (e.g. in gastro-oesophageal \[GO\] reflux)

Top Tips (Top Clues) • The first clinical issue in a child with chest
pain is to decide whether the history and clinical findings suggest an
organic or non-organic cause. • Idiopathic chest pain is the most common
cause, occurring in 20%–45% of cases. It is defined by absence of cause
for the chest pain after a thorough history, physical examination and
laboratory testing, excluding thereby organic disease such as cardiac or
pulmonary disease. • Chest pain, discomfort or heaviness on exercise
suggests exercise-induced bronchospasm. A bronchodilator before the
exercise is likely to prevent these symptoms and suggest the diagnosis.
• Costochondritis (Tietze’s syndrome), frequently caused by viral
infection, is characterised by localised swelling of the costo-chondral,
costo-sternal or sterno-clavicular joints, mostly involving the second
and third ribs. Chest movements or taking a deep breath may worsen the
pain. • Acid reflux can cause retrosternal or left-sided chest pain with
or without epigastric pain, often presenting as burning sensation. • A
typical psychogenic chest pain: dull or sharp, of short duration and
unrelated to exercise. Teenagers are mostly affected. Inquire about loss
of a relative, a pending examination, bullying at school, breakup in
relations with a friend or a close relative who has had angina or a
heart attack. • Chronic or recurrent episodes of chest pain lasting more
than 6 months without abnormal findings are likely to be psychogenic.
This cause accounts for 5%–10% of cases, mostly in girls.

Red Flags • Chest pain in infancy is difficult to diagnose. An infant
who presents with sweating, restlessness and crying (as equivalent signs
for expressing chest pain) may have a serious cardiac disease, e.g.
acute chest syndrome in SCA or anomalous origin of the coronary
arteries. • Serious attention has to be given to children who present
with abnormal physical examination findings, abnormal ECG, exertional
chest pain (after excluding respiratory disease), associated palpitation
or a family history of cardiomyopathy. Referral for further evaluation
is essential. • When the presentation of chest pain or discomfort is
associated with syncope, a cardiac cause needs to be considered such as
aortic stenosis, atrial myxoma (associated with tuberous sclerosis),
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, long Q-T syndrome and supraventricular
tachycardia (SVT) with very rapid heart rate. • Patients with marfanoid
appearance and chest pain require close attention because they are at
risk of dilatation of the ascending aorta and dissecting aneurysm.

FURTHER READING Friedman KG, Alexander ME. Chest pain and syncope in
children: A practical approach to the diagnosis of cardiac disease. J
Pediatr 2013;163(3):896–901.

10

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

COUGH Clinical Overview Cough is one of the most common symptoms in
children. It has been estimated that young children develop five to
eight episodes of cough a year that typically resolve within 7–10 days.
A viral URTI is the most common cause of acute cough, while asthma is
the most common cause of chronic cough. Cough may be a symptom of
extrapulmonary disease such as myocarditis or congestive cardiac
failure. For practical purpose, cough is defined as acute (&lt;2 weeks),
or chronic (&gt;4 weeks). Cough has to be persistent daily to be defined
as chronic. Chronic cough is subdivided into specific (cough in the
presence of identifiable respiratory disease or known cause) and
non-specific cough (absence of respiratory disease or known cause).
Cough is also divided into dry (e.g. asthma) and wet-moist
(bronchiectasis). Prescribing medications to suppress the cough is not
part of paediatric practice, but finding the underlying cause of cough
is essential.

Possible Diagnoses Onset in Infants Common URTI Lower respiratory tract
infection (LRTI) Viral-induced wheeze Aspiration GO reflux Rare
Tracheo-oesophageal fistula Bronchiectasis Congenital lobar emphysema
Pertussis

Children

URTI (e.g. viral URTI, croup) LRTI (e.g. pneumonia, bronchitis) Asthma
Allergy (dust or pollen inhalation) Psychogenic (Habit cough)

Ciliary dyskinesia Inhaled foreign body Cystic fibrosis (CF) Drugs
(angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor) Pertussis Bronchiectasis
α-1-Antitypic deficiency Drugs (angiotensin-converting enzyme
inhibitors) Pulmonary tuberculosis Oesophageal-tracheal fistula Severe
chest wall deformity Achalasia

11

Chest

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance Associated wheeze The only symptom
Runny/blocked nose Associated fever Low oxygen saturation

URTI

LRTI

Asthma

Allergy

Psychogenic

No No Yes Yes Possible

Possible No No Yes Yes

Yes No Possible Possible Yes

Possible Possible Yes No Possible

No Possible No No No

Recommended Investigations ** FBC: leukocytosis suggests bacterial
infection, common in asthma; eosinophilia in allergy ** Sputum for
culture from children with productive cough \*\* Lung function testing,
spirometry and peak flow measurements \*\* Chest X-ray is very helpful
in diagnosing pneumonia, foreign body \*\* CT scan of the lung to
diagnose bronchiectasis \*\* Sweat test if CF is suspected \*\*
Bronchoscopy for unexplained cough \*\* Gastric pH study for cases
suspected of having GO reflux

Top Tips • Cough is usually self-limited and the focus should be
directed at the cause of the cough, not at the symptom cough. Educate
parents that ‘cough medicines’ are unlikely to help children with cough.
• Children’s cough is rarely productive, therefore the term wet cough
rather than productive cough is more appropriate. • Although wheezing
with cough is usually present in asthma, cough may be the only symptom,
which characteristically worsens with activity and at night. • If the
cough is persistent and a diagnosis has not been established, a trial
with a bronchodilator is worthwhile; sometimes inhaled steroid is
helpful. • Protracted bacterial bronchitis (PBB) is commonly found in
young children with chronic cough that worsens when changing posture.
There is no abnormality on physical examination or on chest X-ray. The
condition improves on antibiotics for 2 weeks. • In a child with
pertussis-like cough, who is fully immunised, adenovirus and other
viruses may have caused the illness. The classical ‘whoop’ is often not
present in immunised children. • Children with bronchiectasis present
with chronic wet cough, recurrent chest infections and often with
intermittent purulent sputum and haemoptysis. Finger clubbing and
crackles on chest auscultation are often found. • All children with
chronic cough should have lung function tests, chest X-ray and oxygen
saturation performed. • A psychogenic or habit cough is typically loud
and repetitive (often seen as throat clearing), absent during sleep and
unresponsive to any medication. Duration may be a few weeks or months.

12

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

Red Flags • The possibility of foreign body always has to be considered
with chronic and unexplained cough in young children. If missed,
bronchiectasis is likely to ensue. • A child who presents with cough on
exertion only could have asthma. Peak flow measurements before and after
exercise, with and without a bronchodilator, will help establish the
diagnosis. • A severe coughing paroxysm causing high intrathoracic
pressure and reduced venous return, manifesting as a red face, may
result in cerebral hypoxia and syncope. • Cases of protracted bacterial
bronchitis are often misdiagnosed as asthma, resulting in a persistence
of symptoms that can lead to bronchiectasis. • An underweight child with
chronic cough should undergo sweat test to exclude CF. • Children with
developmental delay may present with persistent cough due to aspiration
and aspiration pneumonia. The cough can mimic and be misdiagnosed as
asthma or bronchitis.

FURTHER READING Weinberger M, Lockshin B. When is cough functional, and
how should be treated. Breathe (Sheff) 2017;13(1):22–30.

13

Chest

COUGHING UP BLOOD (HAEMOPTYSIS) Clinical Overview Haemoptysis is defined
as coughing or expectoration of blood or the presence of blood-tinged
sputum. It is always a frightening experience for patients and their
parents, warranting immediate diagnostic attention. In contrast to
adults, haemoptysis is not a common symptom in children and is usually
not life threatening. There are numerous causes of haemoptysis, which
usually can be diagnosed by obtaining a careful history, physical
examination and laboratory testing. In general, the source of the
bleeding is from either the lungs or the bronchial system. The amount of
bleeding from the lung tends to be small compared to the bleeding from
the bronchi, which produce a larger quantity of blood. Extrapulmonary
causes of haemoptysis are rare but may include nasopharyngeal infection
or foreign body in the upper airways. Haemoptysis must be differentiated
from epistaxis and haematemesis.

Possible Diagnoses Infants

Children

Common Side effect of surfactant pulmonary Post-intubation Disseminated
intravascular coagulopathy Coagulopathy Pulmonary oedema

Pneumonia Coagulopathy CF Vigorous cough Foreign body (FB) (mostly &lt;4
years of age)

Rare Bronchiectasis Pulmonary embolism Pulmonary oedema Lung abscess
Pulmonary tuberculosis Left ventricular heart failure (mitral stenosis)
Goodpasture’s syndrome Wegener’s granulomatosis Hereditary haemorrhagic
telangiectasia Pulmonary vascular malformation Hydatid cyst Pulmonary
tumours (adenoma, haemartoma) Sarcoidosis Connective tissue diseases
(particularly systemic lupus erythematosus \[SLE\]) Haemosiderosis
Mycetoma

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance Pneumonia Massive bleeding Short
history Associated fever Bleeding elsewhere Previous haemoptysis

No Yes Yes No No

Coagulopathy Possible Possible No Yes Yes

CF

Vigorous Cough

FB

No No Possible No Possible

No Yes Possible No No

Possible Yes Possible No No

14

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

Recommended Investigations \*\*  FBC: low Hb to confirm anaemia;
leukocytosis in pneumonia; low platelet in thrombocytopenia \*\*\*
Coagulation study with international normalised ratio, prothrombin time
and partial thromboplastin time in case of coagulopathy
**  Auto-antibody screen may be positive for connective tissue diseases
**  Sputum cytology for suspected Tb or tumour \*\*\* Chest X-ray (the
most valuable investigation) to find the cause of the haemoptysis \*\*\*
Sweat test for suspected cases of CF \*\*  Bronchoscopy and
high-resolution CT scan of the lungs in unclear cases of haemoptysis

Top Tips • Haemoptysis in young children is usually caused by benign
conditions such as vigorous cough. • After a careful history and
physical examination, a chest X-ray should be performed. If the
diagnosis is not clear: bronchoscopy and chest CT scan and referral to a
chest specialist. • A child with haemoptysis and high fever is most
likely having pneumonia. • The low-pressure pulmonary system tends to
produce a non-profuse haemoptysis while the bronchi, which are at
systemic pressure, tend to produce more massive bleeding. • Haemoptysis
(with history of lung disease, frothy, bright-red, absence of nausea and
vomiting) should be easily differentiated from haematemesis (with
history of gastric or hepatic disease, coffee-ground, brown to red,
presence of nausea and vomiting, mixed with food particles). • About 5%
of patients with CF may develop haemoptysis, which may recur. •
Tuberculosis is on the increase in the United Kingdom; the disease
should not be forgotten as a cause of haemoptysis.

Red Flags • When a child presents with haemoptysis, look for clubbing of
the fingers to identify CF. • Young children under 5 years swallow their
sputum and the minor haemoptysis may not be obvious, unless the
haemoptysis is massive. • Beware that among obscure causes of
haemoptysis is left-ventricular heart failure or mitral stenosis causing
pulmonary hypertension. • Pulmonary embolism may cause haemoptysis.
Consider this diagnosis if there is evidence of deep vein thrombosis or
the child is at risk of thrombosis, such as SCA or homocystinuria. •
Factitious haemoptysis is rare but should be considered in the
differential diagnosis of unclear cause of haemoptysis when the medical
history or the patient’s behaviour is unusual.

FURTHER READING Sim J, Kim H, Lee H et al. Etiology of hemoptysis in
children: A single institutional series of 40 cases. Allergy Asthma
Immunol Res 2009;1(1):41–44.

15

Chest

NIPPLE DISCHARGE Clinical Overview Unless the cause of nipple discharge
is obvious (e.g. local inflammation or medication induced), this
phenomenon must be carefully evaluated, as for adults. Although the
condition is usually alarming for parents, fortunately its causes are
usually benign in children. Discharge may be persistent or intermittent,
scant or abundant, free flowing or elicited by nipple stimulation, and
unilateral or bilateral. It is due to a variety of causes. In general,
milky discharge, thick or not, suggests a benign condition (except
galactorrhoea due to pituitary prolactinoma), while purulent discharge
suggests infection, and serous or bloody discharge may suggest mastitis,
mammary duct ectasia, intraductal papilloma or rarely cancer. Duct
ectasia is the most common cause of bloody discharge.

Possible Diagnoses Infants

Children

Common Physiological Mastitis Areola abscess Medication induced Mammary
duct ectasia

Local stimulation Mammary duct ectasia Medications (e.g. contraceptives)
Breast infection (mastitis, abscess) Galactorrhoea

Rare Pregnancy Breast cancer (adenocarcinoma) Prolactin-secreting
pituitary tumour Intraductal papilloma Fibroadenoma Hypothyroidism
Fibrocystic breast disease Injury to the breast Idiopathic

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance

Common in adolescents Bilateral Occur in boys CNS symptoms (e.g.
headache) Bloody discharge

Local Stimulation

Mammary Duct Ectasia

Drugs

Breast Infection

Galactorrhoea

Yes Possible Possible No Possible

Possible No Possible No Yes

Possible Yes Yes No No

Possible No Possible No Yes

Possible Possible Possible No No

Recommended Investigations \*\*\* Prolactin level to check for
hyperprolactinaemia; thyroid function test (TFT) to check for
hypothyroidism

16

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

*** Microscopic examination to confirm galactorrhoea by finding the
presence of fat ­globules; culture of the discharge is indicated for
purulent discharge *** Pregnancy test to be considered for post-puberty
girls if clinically indicated \*\*\* Ultrasound scan is the best
imaging investigation and is an essential diagnostic tool
\*\*\* Cranial MRI to exclude hyperprolactinaemia

Top Tips • The presence of more than two breasts, termed polymastia (or
supernumerary), is found in up to 6% of the population. It is seen along
the embryological milk lines, which extend from the axilla to the
inguinal region, leaving later two segments that become breasts. Failure
to regress causes ectopic or supernumerary breast tissue. •
Galactorrhoea is a discharge of milk or milk-like secretion from the
breast, unrelated to childbirth or nursing. In the neonates, nipple
discharge (witch’s milk) should be regarded as physiological and is best
left alone, as manipulation may cause mastitis. • Idiopathic
galactorrhoea is a diagnosis of exclusion and should not be diagnosed
easily unless other possible underlying conditions have been eliminated
by thorough history, examination and laboratory evaluation. • Benign
conditions of the breast with nipple discharge include abnormal response
of the breast tissue to maternal hormones and intraductal papilloma.
Mammary duct ectasia is the most common cause of bloody nipple discharge
in the paediatric population. • Examination of the discharge assists in
diagnosis: in benign conditions it is usually milky thick or clear;
infection is associated with purulent discharge; and in cancer it is
usually serous or bloody. • History of any medication should be
obtained. Medications which may cause galactorrhoea include
metoclopramide, tricyclic antidepressants, phenothiazines or
contraceptive pills.

Red Flags • In galactorrhoea (spontaneous flow of milk), pituitary
prolactinoma may be the underlying pathology, which is among the most
common type of pituitary tumours. CNS examination should be performed,
including visual examination, to exclude tumours. Prolactin level
correlates well with the tumour size; a serum prolactin level &gt;200
ng/mL is abnormal. • Swelling in the axilla, chest wall or even in the
vulva may be due to supernumerary breasts. Although they are benign,
distinction from other benign or malignant masses is necessary. • Bloody
nipple discharge may suggest inflammatory breast conditions (mastitis),
duct ectasia and intraductal papilloma. These may mimic breast cancer
and should be considered. • Duct ectasia may resolve spontaneously
within 3–9 months. Any surgical intervention should be considered very
carefully because of the damage to the normal developing bud tissue. •
Hypothyroidism is second after pituitary pathology in causing
galactorrhoea. Thyroid function tests should be carried out for any
obscure case of nipple discharge.

FURTHER READING Nascimento M, Portela A, Espada F et al. Bloody nipple
discharge in infancy – A report of two cases. BMJ Case Rep
2012;2012:bcr2012006649. Singal R, Mehta SK, Bala J et al. A study of
evaluation and management of rare congenital breast diseases. J Clin
Diagn Res 2016;10(10):PC18–PC24.

17

Chest

PALPITATION Clinical Overview Cardiologists may use the term palpitation
to describe an awareness of the heartbeat due to abnormality of the
heart rhythm ranging from simple, benign ectopic atrial or ventricular
beats to more important tachyarrhythmias and life-threatening cardiac
diseases. Patients may use the term to describe a perception or
awareness of irregular, fast or skipped heartbeats, or simple awareness
of their pulse, particularly when it is fast or when lying on one side
in bed. A young child who cannot explain the event by words may stop his
or her normal activity, expressing discomfort or clinching the left side
of the chest. Palpitation is usually a terrifying experience for
children and for their parents. In paediatric practise, the differential
diagnosis is usually narrowed between tachycardia (such as SVT), ectopic
beats and cardiac diseases. Any palpitation with a history of syncope
without warning is most likely of cardiac origin (ventricular
tachycardia). In such case, an urgent evaluation is essential.

Possible Diagnoses Infants

Children

Common Sinus arrhythmia Premature atrial contractions

Rare SVT Ventricular tachycardia Neonatal Graves’ disease

Sinus tachycardia (fever, exercise) Anxiety Anaemia Arrhythmia (such as
ectopic beats, SVT) Drugs (e.g. bronchodilators, use of stimulants)

Thyrotoxicosis Heart diseases (cardiomyopathy) Electrolytes disturbance
Pheochromocytoma Carcinoid syndrome Hypoglycaemia (e.g. from insulinoma)

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance Short (few minutes) episode Regular
rhythm Associated pallor Diagnosis requires ECG Associated tremor

Sinus Tachycardia

Anxiety

Anaemia

Arrhythmia

Drugs

No

Possible

No

Possible

No

Yes No No No

Yes Possible No Possible

Yes Yes Yes No

No Possible Yes No

Yes No Possible Yes

Recommended Investigations *** ECG to diagnose arrhythmia, e.g. SVT,
sinus tachycardia or Wolff–Parkinson–White (WPW) syndrome; 24-hour ECG
*** FBC to check the Hb for anaemia \*\*\* TFTs to diagnose
hyperthyroidism

18

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

\*\*  Urea and electrolytes (U&E) mainly to check for a potassium level
that may aggravate arrhythmia \*\* A chest X-ray may be helpful showing
cardiac enlargement in case of failure \*\* Treadmill exercise test may
help reveal any exercise-induced arrhythmia

Top Tips • Sinus arrhythmia (increasing heartbeats in inspiration,
slowing down in expiration) is normal in neonates and older children; it
becomes accentuated during activities. • If the history suggests
arrhythmia and examination is normal, 24-hour ECG monitor is indicated.
• Most patients with palpitation do not have a cardiac lesion. •
Although a diagnosis of cardiac arrhythmia can often be made during the
attack, between attacks heart and ECG may be entirely normal. Exceptions
to this are WPW syndrome, associated with SVT, and long QT syndrome. •
The treatment of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder with
stimulants (methylphenidate, amphetamine) has been a common practise for
decades. Common side effects include insomnia, nervousness and
palpitation. • In considering the differential diagnosis of palpitation
due to arrhythmia, the two important common diagnoses are SVT or ectopic
beats. Ectopic beats are harmless, provided there is no heart disease,
anaemia or thyrotoxicosis. Sudden onset of tachycardia in association
with dizziness and dyspnoea is very suggestive of SVT. • It is uncertain
whether sport participation is a risk factor for sudden cardiac death
(SCD), as SCD may also occur in recreational activity, quiet time and
sleep.

Red Flags • The normal pulse of an awake infant younger than 3 months
ranges between 100 and 220/minute. Sinus arrhythmia is normal, and it is
abnormal for a child not to have sinus arrhythmia. • A child with
palpitation and pallor with a heart murmur should not be diagnosed as
having cardiac disease; the murmur may be a haemic functional murmur,
which disappears once the anaemia is corrected. • Palpitation is more
serious if it is associated with chest pain, shortness of breath,
fainting or in the presence of cardiac disease. Urgent evaluation is
needed. • SVT in a young child presents as CCF. Conversion SVT to sinus
rhythm is urgently required. • Beware that palpitation could
occasionally be a risk factor for sudden cardiac death in the young.
Other associated features include episodes of chest pain, syncope and
long QT syndrome in the ECG. • Pheochromocytoma is rare but potentially
fatal unless recognised and treated. Children may present with sweating,
syncope and palpitation.

FURTHER READING Ackerman M, Atkins DL, Triedman JK. Sudden cardiac death
in the young. Circulation 2016;133(10):​ 1006–1026.

19

Chest

RESPIRATORY NOISES Clinical Overview Although respiratory noises as
reported by the parents are extremely common, these noises are often
difficult to be differentiated from each other. The difficulty is
compounded by the fact that children may have multiple noises, being
intermittent and changing from one noise to another in a few minutes or
according to awake or sleep position (polyphonic). Clinicians should
realise that it is very common that when parents report a type of noise,
e.g. wheezing, it is often not confirmed. It is important to know that
snuffles and stridor are caused by obstruction of the extrathoracic
airways (nose, pharynx, larynx and the extrathoracic portion of the
trachea), while wheezing is caused by intrathoracic obstruction.
Clinicians should be familiar with a few common noises (wheeze, stridor,
rattle, grunt, snore and snuffle) and must be confident when diagnosing
these specific types of noises. An error in recognising specific types
of noises will lead to diagnostic and therapeutic errors.

Possible Diagnoses Infants

Children

Common Snuffles Stridor Grunt Wheeze Rattle Rare Mew

Wheeze Stridor Rattle Snore Grunt

Snuffle Purr Moan Squeak

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance Ill looking Expiratory Inspiratory
Associated cough Worse at night

Wheeze

Stridor

Grunt

Rattle

Snore

Possible Yes Possible Yes Yes

Possible No Yes Possible Yes

Yes Yes No Possible Possible

No Yes Yes Possible Possible

No No Yes No Yes

Recommended Investigations \*\* FBC: leukocytosis, and blood culture if
the stridor is suspected to be due to epiglottitis \*\*\* Blood for
chromosomal analysis if cri-du-chat is suspected **  Chest X-ray often
required with more persistent symptoms **\* Lung function tests: in
persistent wheezing; peak flow measurement in children older than 5
years **  Direct laryngoscopy for unusual features of stridor **  Video
recording the respiratory noises by the parents is helpful to
differentiate noises

20

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

Top Tips • Acute snuffles are mostly due to a viral infection, while
persistent ones are due to allergic rhinitis, adenoid hypertrophy or
snuffles of infancy. The latter noise is so common that it can be
regarded as ‘normal’; it has no discharge and usually disappears between
ages 3 and 6 months. • When parents report their child has a wheeze, the
clinician must confirm it. Children may have rattles or stridor. Doctors
should imitate a wheeze, or to ask the parents to imitate the sound. •
Extrathoracic obstruction produces inspiratory stridor while the
intrathoracic obstruction produces wheeze. The association of hoarseness
and stridor suggests an obstruction at the vocal cords of the larynx;
when cough is present, the trachea is involved. • Laryngomalacia is the
most common cause of chronic stridor, noted usually soon after birth,
and disappears at the age of 12–18 months. It is not associated with
cough, failure to thrive or feeding problems. It does not need a
laryngoscopy to confirm it unless there are atypical features. •
Hoarseness in laryngomalacia is not present because vocal cords are not
involved. Hoarseness with stridor is very suggestive of
laryngotracheobronchitis. • A rare syndrome that produces high-pitched
mewing cry, closely resembling the cry of a kitten, is cri-du-chat, due
to a deletion of the short arm of chromosome 5. • A rattle noise should
not be considered an asthma symptom: if acute it is due to viral
infection; if persistent it is due to GO reflux, or sputum retention
found in neuromuscular diseases.

Red Flags • Persistent snuffles are often misdiagnosed as cold, and many
topical medications, such as sprays, are prescribed unnecessarily, and
some are harmful. • Persistent nasal snuffles need to be differentiated
from partial choanal atresia. In older children, polyps need to be
excluded. If a polyp is found, CF has to be ruled out. • The term
snuffles was first used for children with congenital syphilis. Although
this infection is rare, it is on the rise, and it may present with the
triad of anaemia, snuffle and splenomegaly. • A diagnosis of inhalation
of a foreign body causing stridor or wheezing should never be missed. •
A major error is misdiagnosing stridor from an upper airway obstruction
as wheeze, leading to incorrect treatment that can be life threatening.
• In contrast to other respiratory noises, expiratory grunt is usually a
serous sign seen in neonates in association with respiratory distress
syndrome, and in older children with pneumonia.

FURTHER READING Maguire A, Gopalabaje S, Eastham K. All that wheezes is
not asthma: A 6-year-old with foreign body aspiration and no suggestive
history. BMJ Case Rep 2012;2012:bcr2012006640.

2

ABDOMEN

ACUTE ABDOMINAL PAIN Clinical Overview Acute abdominal pain is one of
the most common symptoms in children. The main objective in dealing with
acute abdominal pain is to differentiate between benign self-limited
conditions, such as constipation or gastroenteritis, and more
life-threatening surgical conditions such as volvulus or appendicitis.
The term acute abdomen refers to an intra-abdominal condition, which
usually requires a surgical intervention, such as appendicitis. This
accounts for around 1% of all children presenting with acute abdominal
pain. Pain is classified as visceral pain that is usually dull, poorly
localized and perceived in the midline in response to mechanical
(stretching or ischaemia) and chemical stimuli. Visceral pain
originating from the foregut (e.g. lower oesophagus, stomach) is
typically felt in the epigastric area; pain originating from the midgut
(e.g. small intestine) is typically felt in the peri-umbilical area; and
pain originating from the hindgut (e.g. colon) is typically felt in the
lower abdomen. Somatic pain receptors are located in the parietal
peritoneum, muscle and skin, which transmit pain via the spinal cord
from T6 to L1. Somatic pain is typically sharp, intense and well
localised. Referred pain is felt in distant areas of the same cutaneous
dermatome as the affected organs, e.g. pneumonia or pharyngitis causing
abdominal pain. Pain can be sharp and localised or a vague ache.

Possible Diagnoses Infants

Children

Common Hunger Infection elsewhere (ear) Urinary tract infection (UTI)
Gastroenteritis (GE) Evening colic

Rare Incarcerated hernia Intussusception Intestinal obstruction Meckel’s
diverticulum Volvulus Trauma Inborn error of metabolism Imperforate
hymen

GE Psychogenic (e.g. anxiety, school phobia) Constipation Appendicitis
Mesenteric adenitis (MA) Migraine

Referred pain (e.g. pneumonia, pharyngitis) UTI Renal stones
Pancreatitis Trauma Testicular/ovarian torsion Peritonitis Incarcerated
hernia Meckel’s diverticulum Henoch–Schönlein’s purpura (HSP)
(Continued)

21

22

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter (Continued) Infants

Children Hepatitis Intussusception Intestinal obstruction Crohn’s
disease (CD) Diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) Sickle cell anaemia Gall
bladder stones

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance Diarrhoea Diffuse pain Abdominal
tenderness Localised pain Fever

GE

Psychogenic

Constipation

Appendicitis

Mesenteric Adenitis

Yes Yes Possible No Possible

No Yes Possible No No

No Yes Possible No No

Possible No Yes Yes Yes

No No Yes No Yes

Recommended Investigations *** Urinalysis and culture to confirm UTI
*** Stool culture for bacterial GE; viral antigen detection for
rotavirus \*\* Full blood count (FBC): leukocytosis suggests
inflammatory or infectious causes \*\*\* Serum amylase/lipase for
suspected pancreatitis \*\*\* Liver function tests to diagnose
hepatitis, blood glucose, urea and electrolytes (U&E) and blood gases
for DKA \*\*  Abdominal plain X-ray confirms impacted stool masses in
constipation, signs of bowel obstruction \*\*\* Abdominal ultrasound for
suspected renal or gall bladder stones \*\*\* Barium enema or
air-contrast enema for cases with suspected intussusception

Top Tips • Abdominal examination should be performed with extreme
gentleness and compassion; careful hands-off inspection being the first
step, followed by non-intimidating position of sitting down or kneeling
to be at the same level with the child. A young child is best examined
in a parent’s arms or lap. Distracting the child while palpating the
abdomen is very helpful. • A student or postgraduate doctor in an
examination who hurts the child while examining the abdomen should
expect to fail. • It is worth asking the child to point with his/her
finger to the area ‘where it hurts most’. • The closer the pain to the
umbilicus, the less likely it is to be organic disease. • The use of
sedative or analgesic does not increase the risk of misdiagnosis. •
Urinalysis is essential in a febrile child with acute abdominal pain,
particularly if the fever has no localised source. • Children with
appendicitis present initially with vague abdominal pain, poorly
localised in the peri-umbilical area, followed by nausea. Within 6–48
hours, the pain migrates to the right lower quadrant followed by
vomiting and fever. • Typical abdomen in GE is non-distended, soft and
mildly tender, with mid-abdominal cramping but little or no guarding.
Vomiting usually precedes the diarrhoea by as much as 12–24 hours.

Abdomen

23

• In cases of mesenteric adenitis, stool culture for the bacteria
Yersinia should be performed. • Meckel’s diverticulum affects 2% of the
population, and of these 2% become symptomatic. About 60% of diverticula
contain heterotopic gastric or endometrial tissue that can cause
symptoms.

Red Flags • The clinician’s skills must be used to differentiate between
a self-limited process (e.g. viral gastroenteritis, constipation) and
more life-threatening surgical emergencies (e.g. intussusception).
Overlooking a serious organic aetiology is a major concern. • Bilious
vomiting must always be taken seriously because of possible malrotation
or volvulus. • Extra-abdominal conditions (e.g. tonsillitis, lower lobe
pneumonia, testicular disease, spine or hip synovitis) can produce
abdominal pain mimicking abdominal emergencies, e.g. appendicitis.
Examination of these sites is essential. • Be aware that a young child
with appendicitis may present with diarrhoea only. • Children with MA
may present with acute abdominal pain in the lower quadrant of the
abdomen mimicking appendicitis, but pain is more diffuse in MA. If in
doubt, appendectomy should be considered. • Because of difficulty in
evaluating the abdomen in young children with appendicitis, they often
present with acute abdomen due to perforation. Perforation rates are
high in this age group. Children typically have a longer history of
pain, greater systemic effect, high fever, more generalized tenderness
and absent bowel sounds. • A young child with mild abdominal pain and
vomiting who has clinical signs of dehydration but no ketones in the
urine should be investigated to rule out an inborn error of metabolism.

FURTHER READING Yang WC, Chen CY, Wu HP. Etiology of non-traumatic acute
abdomen in pediatric emergency departments. World J Clin Cases
2013;1(9):276–284.

24

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

RECURRENT ABDOMINAL PAIN Clinical Overview Recurrent abdominal pain
(RAP) is a common symptom affecting 10%–20% of children; schoolage
children (5–14 years) have the highest incidence. Recently (Rome
criteria), the term of functional gastrointestinal disorders (FGIDs) was
introduced and includes irritable bowel syndrome (constipation
predominately, diarrhoea predominately or mixed); functional dyspepsia
(epigastric pain, postprandial distress, early satiation); abdominal
migraine (peri-umbilical pain lasting at least an hour, with pallor,
nausea, vomiting, anorexia and headache); and functional abdominal pain.
RAP is significant because it causes a high rate of morbidity, missed
school days, high use of health resources and parental anxiety. It was
defined as ‘at least 3 recurrent episodes of pain, severe enough to
affect child’s activities, over a period of at least 3 months, and the
symptoms cannot be attributed to another medical condition’ (Apley’s
criteria); Apley in 1958 estimated that only 8% of patients had RAP.
Nowadays, a higher estimate is accepted mainly because irritable bowel
syndrome (IBS) has been recognised as an important cause of RAP, and
because of a high rate of detecting pathology by newer imaging
technology. Parasites, such as Giardia, are a common and important cause
of RAP in developing countries. Most children with RAP have no organic
diseases (functional abdominal pain). Non-organic causes are typically
central to the abdomen, with no guarding, rebound, rigidity or abnormal
physical signs or investigation. Recurrent crying episodes in an infant
who draws the legs up and appears to be in pain are defined as colic.

Possible Diagnoses Infants

Children

Common Infantile colic (evening colic) Gastro-oesophageal (GO) reflux
Lactose intolerance Cow’s milk protein allergy Parasites (Giardia) Rare
Coeliac disease Meckel’s diverticulum Child abuse Scurvy Sickle cell
anaemia (SCA)

Functional (psychogenic, e.g. school phobia) IBS Food
intolerance/allergy Abdominal migraine (cyclic vomiting syndrome)
Parasites (Giardia)

Inflammatory bowel diseases (IBDs) (CD, ulcerative colitis) Recurrent
urinary tract infection Familial Mediterranean fever Child abuse
Porphyria SCA Coeliac disease Meckel’s diverticulum Pancreatitis
Choledochal cyst Hepatitis Stones in the urinary system and gall bladder
Lead poisoning Peptic ulcer Wilms’ tumour

25

Abdomen

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance Weight loss Bloody diarrhoea Stool
changes Vomiting Cause of malabsorption

Functional RAP

IBS

Food Intolerance

Abdominal Migraine

Parasites (Giardia)

No No No No No

No No Yes No No

Possible Possible Yes Possible Possible

No No No Yes No

Possible Possible Possible Possible Yes

Recommended Investigations \*\*\* Urinalysis: haematuria suggests renal
stones; leukocytes and nitrite suggest UTI \*\* Stool for parasites and
culture; screening testing for Helicobacter pylori \*\* Stool
calprotectin to differentiate between IBD and IBS \*\*  FBC with
C-reactive protein (CRP): useful in suggesting inflammation and
infection; anaemia in SCA \*\* Liver function tests (to diagnose
hepatitis, Gilbert’s syndrome); coeliac screening tests \*\*\* Abdominal
ultrasound scan to confirm renal or gall bladder stones, and tumours

Top Tips • The closer the pain is to the umbilicus, the less likely it
is to be significant. Pain away from the umbilicus is suggestive of
organic causes. • Children of parents with gastrointestinal (GI)
disease, children with stress and children with obesity or previous
abdominal surgery are more likely to have RAP. • Functional abdominal
diseases are suggested by a symptom-free interval, the healthy
appearance of the child and an absence of abnormalities on examination.
Organic diseases tend to have a progressive course and the presence of
abnormalities on examination. • Pain that is followed, not preceded, by
vomiting is suggestive of appendicitis. • Infant colic is defined as
irritability paroxysms with fussiness or crying that starts and ends
without clear reasons, lasting at least 3 h/day, 3 days/week, for at
least 3 weeks in a healthy baby. • IBS accounts for the majority of
paediatric RAP, and is due to dysregulation of visceral neural pathways,
leading to visceral hyperalgesia. Infection or stress may trigger this
sensitisation. • Clinical presentation of IBD often overlaps with IBS.
Stool calprotectin has proved to be very useful in the differential
diagnosis between IBD and IBS: low calprotectin makes IBD unlikely. •
Pain in constipation is often overrated as a diagnostic entity. It
should not be considered simply because no other cause except
constipation is elicited from the history and examination. • Note that
food intolerance/allergy is among the most common causes of RAP in an
otherwise healthy child. Eliminating the suspected food item
(particularly milk or wheat) for about 2 weeks is the best diagnostic
and therapeutic tool. Blood or skin testing is of limited value. •
Psychogenic causes should be diagnosed on positive grounds, not by
excluding organic disease. Parents should not hear ‘the cause is
psychological’. They should be supported by being offered reassurance
that their child is healthy and the abdominal pain will not affect
his/her well-being.

26

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

Red Flags • A child known to have recurrent functional abdominal pain
could present one day with an organic cause which may need surgical
intervention. • Alarm features that suggest organic causes include
children younger than 4 years of age, weight loss, falling off growth
centile, persistent pain in the right or left upper or right lower
quadrant of the abdomen or in the supra-pubic area, or association with
vomiting, persistent diarrhoea or fever. • Other alarm features include
a family history of inflammatory bowel diseases, pain associated with
dysphagia or heartburn or with night-waking, oral and/or perianal
lesions or arthritis that suggest non-functional causes of abdominal
pain. • Remember that the frequency of RAP and the duration of symptoms
are often longer in children who were victims of sexual abuse. If such a
case is suspected, the child should be protected in a hospital
environment until the diagnosis is conclusively made.

FURTHER READING Horst S, Shelby G, Anderson J et al. Predicting
persistence of functional abdominal pain from childhood into young
adulthood. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2014;12(12):2026–2032. Korterink
JJ, Diederson K, Benninga MA et al. Epidemiology of pediatric functional
abdominal pain disorders: A meta-analysis. PLOS ONE 2015;10(5):e0126982.

27

Abdomen

ABDOMINAL DISTENSION Clinical Overview Abdominal distension is defined
as an increase of girth of the abdomen caused by air, fluid, stool, mass
or organomegaly. It is a common clinical finding that must be evaluated
carefully. History is of paramount importance in giving a diagnostic
clue, e.g. duration of the distension (acute or chronic?), any weight
loss, diarrhoea or vomiting (and is the vomiting bile stained?). Many
toddlers, who are thriving and well, often have a mild and harmless
abdominal distension. This condition may be associated with toddler’s
diarrhoea. A long history of abdominal distension associated with
underweight and loose motions is very suggestive of malabsorption, and
coeliac disease is the most common cause. Vomiting, particularly bile
stained, suggests intestinal obstruction.

Possible Diagnoses Infants

Children

Common Mechanical ventilation Necrotising enterocolitis (NEC) Intestinal
atresia or stenosis Meconium plug or ileus Abdominal mass (tumour,
hepatosplenomegaly) Rare Sepsis Hepatomegaly, splenomegaly Tumour
(nephroblastoma, neuroblastoma) Imperforate hymen Hydrometrocolpos
Gartner’s duct cyst Prolapsed ureterocele, urethrocele Chloramphenicol
toxicity (gray syndrome) Renal vein thrombosis (flank mass)

Physiological in toddlers (usually mild) Malabsorption (coeliac disease,
Giardia) Intestinal obstruction Constipation Abdominal mass (e.g.
hepatic or renal)

Glycogen storage disease Hirschsprung’s disease Ascites (e.g. nephrotic
syndrome, systemic lupus erythematosus) Ovarian cyst Kwashiorkor Hydatid
cyst Aerophagia (functional or pathological) Postoperative abdominal
distension Abdominal (peritoneal) tuberculosis Cystic fibrosis (CF)
Polycystic renal disease

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance

Thriving Diarrhoea Palpable mass Failure to thrive Vomiting

Physiological (in toddlers)

Malabsorption

Intestinal Obstruction

Constipation

Abdominal Mass

Yes No No No Possible

No Yes No Yes Yes

Yes No Possible No Yes

Yes No Yes No Yes

Possible No Yes No Possible

Recommended Investigations \*\*\* Stool microscopy for Giardia, pus
cells and stool culture \*\* FBC, CRP to screen for infection; blood
culture to rule out sepsis, screening tests for CD

28

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

\*\* Abdominal X-ray for constipation and intestinal obstruction, and
for detection of tumor \*\*\* Ultrasound scan to confirm abdominal
masses, e.g. renal mass, ovarian cyst \*\* Barium enema may suggest
Hirschsprung’s disease; rectal biopsy confirms it \*** Computed
tomography or magnetic resonance imaging to evaluate abdominal masses,
ascites, organomegaly ** Sweat test for cystic fibrosis

Top Tips • In functional gut disorders: abdominal distension is often
associated with bloating (about 50%). Bloating is a subjective sensation
of increased abdominal pressure without an increase in abdominal girth;
distension is associated with similar sensation but with increased
girth. • Although hydronephrosis and multicystic dysplastic kidney are
the two most common abdominal masses, they do not cause abdominal
distension. • Be aware of two important causes of chronic distension:
malabsorption and coeliac disease. • Causes of abdominal distension in
the tropics differ from those in developed countries; there parasites
(e.g. Giardia, hydatid cyst) and kwashiorkor may prevail. • A lower
intestinal obstruction (e.g. Hirschsprung’s disease) usually presents
with abdominal distension and late vomiting, while an upper one presents
with early vomiting and no distension. • Functional aerophagia refers to
excessive air swallowing without significant GI symptoms, whereas
pathological aerophagia is associated with abdominal pain, belching,
burping and flatulence. Typical presentation in both conditions: no
abdominal distension in the morning, followed by progressive abdominal
distension during the day.

Red Flags • Excluding toddler’s physiologic abdominal distension and
aerophagia, abdominal distension should always be considered serious,
requiring usually urgent investigations. • The priority remains to
exclude life-threatening surgical causes of abdominal distension such as
intestinal obstruction. • A child who has failed to thrive with
abdominal distension should not be considered physiologic; the most
likely cause is malabsorption. • Bilious vomiting must be taken
seriously because of the possibility of malrotation with volvulus.

FURTHER READING Morabito G, Romeo C, Romano C. Functional aerophagia in
children: A frequent, atypical disorder. Case Rep Gastroenterol
2014;8(1):123–128.

29

Abdomen

CONSTIPATION Clinical Overview Constipation is a term used to describe
infrequent (two or fewer) defecations per week or hard stools which are
difficult to pass. It is often associated with a history of retentive
posturing, painful defecation, large-diameter stools and large faecal
mass in the rectum. It is important to remember that infrequent
defecation is common in breast-fed babies who may not have a stool for
10 days. There should be no intervention as long as babies are thriving,
feeding well, have no abdominal distension and pass stools without pain
or blood. In older children, the most common reason is withholding stool
for fear of having a bowel movement following an experience of a painful
defecation. A diet insufficient in fiber intake and poor toilet training
play a role. Faecal incontinence is a common complication (about 80%)
and is defined as voluntary or involuntary passage of faeces into the
underwear or in socially inappropriate places, in a child with a
developmental age of at least 4 years. Faecal incontinence not related
to constipation (non-retentive) and organic causes (e.g. anorectal
malformation) is comparatively uncommon.

Differential Diagnosis Infants

Children

Common Normal variant in breast-fed Insufficient fluid intake,
dehydration Neurodisability (CP, myotonica dystrophica) Intestinal
obstruction (e.g. meconium ileus, plug) Change from breast to bottle
feeding Persistent vomiting (e.g. pyloric stenosis) Rare Hirschsprung’s
disease Hypothyroidism Hypercalcaemia Intestinal stricture Anteriorly
displaced anus Imperforate anus Any cause of polyuria (renal tubular
acidosis)

Chronic habitual constipation Prolonged febrile illness Increased output
(e.g. polyuria, vomiting) Neurodisability (CP, myotonica dystrophica)
IBS

Polyuria Recurrent or chronic vomiting Hypercalcaemia Hirschsprung’s
disease (HD) Drugs, such as narcotics, antidepressant Prader-Willi
syndrome Coeliac disease

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance

Only symptom With faecal incontinence Mild symptom Associated loose
stools Short history

Functional Constipation

Prolonged Febrile Illness

Increased Loss (e.g. vomiting)

Neurodisability

IBS

Possible Yes Possible Possible (overflow) Possible

No No Yes No No

No No Possible No Possible

No Possible Possible Possible No

Possible No Yes Yes No

30

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

Recommended Investigations ** ** ** **

Urinalysis to exclude an associated UTI Plain abdominal X-ray: may show
distended bowel and rectum (megacolon) full of faeces Thyroid function
text and serum calcium to exclude hypothyroidism and hypercalcaemia
Rectal biopsy if there is clinical suspicion of Hirschsprung’s disease

Top Tips • By far the most common cause of constipation is functional;
organic diseases (Hirschsprung’s disease, hypothyroidism,
hypercalcaemia, renal tubular acidosis) are rare in practice (&lt;5%). •
Looking at the child can give important clues to the underlying
diagnosis (e.g. hypothyroidism, failure to thrive, distended abdomen in
Hirschsprung’s disease, or elfin face in hypercalcaemia). • Parents
often interpret withholding stool as pushing; explanation should be
given for that. • Although faecal incontinence is usually secondary to
‘overflow’ to faecal retention (in 80%), it may occur without
constipation (functional non-retentive fecal incontinence) in 20%. The
latter is of unclear aetiology but may be associated with emotional
problems. • Hirschsprung’s disease (aganglionic segment) presents with
various degrees of obstruction in neonates. Empty rectum by rectal
palpation may suggest disease.

Red Flags • Constipation should not be accepted as the cause of
abdominal pain without consideration of alternative diagnoses. • Faecal
incontinence associated with constipation may be mistaken as diarrhoea.
The parent should receive information about mechanisms causing faecal
incontinence. • Treatment of children with faecal incontinence is
urgently needed to avoid poor quality of life, poor self-esteem and
social withdrawal. These features disappear after successful treatment.
• Organic causes of faecal incontinence may not be evident in every case
but need to be considered in the evaluation of each case. These include
tethered cord, malabsorption and endocrine causes. • Beware that
constipation may have an underlying physical, sexual or emotional cause.

FURTHER READING Vieira MC, Negrelle ICK, Webber KU et al. Pediatrician’s
knowledge on the approach of functional constipation. Rev Paul Pediatr
2016;34(4):425–431.

31

Abdomen

DIARRHOEA Clinical Overview Diarrhoea is a major health problem and is
the second leading cause of death among children under 5 years old,
accounting for nearly half a million deaths each year globally. It is
defined as three or more episodes of loose or liquid stools and/or
vomiting, possibly accompanied by other symptoms such as fever, nausea
and abdominal pain that results from GI inflammation. In children with
vomiting alone, alternative diagnoses should be considered. Most
diarrhoeal diseases in children living in developed countries are viral
(75%–90% of cases), mild and self-limited, and do not require
hospitalization or laboratory evaluation. Diarrhoea is usually watery,
large and non-bloody. In developing countries, diarrhoea is often severe
with a high rate of deaths. Frequent, small bloody stools with mucus
suggest colitis. With widespread use of rotavirus vaccine beginning in
2006, a substantial decrease in disease prevalence, morbidity and
mortality has been achieved. The most important aspect of evaluation of
diarrhoeal case is to determine the level of dehydration.

Differential Diagnosis Infants

Children

Common Physiologic in breast-fed Milk protein/lactose intolerance
Antibiotic induced Coeliac disease Cystic fibrosis Rare Primary
disaccharide deficiency Acrodermatitis enteropathica Short bowel
syndrome

Acute infective enteritis, GE (viral and bacterial) Antibiotic induced
Postinfectious secondary lactose/protein intolerance Toddler’s diarrhoea
Overflow in constipation

Coeliac disease (CD) IBD IBS Malabsorption Nosocomial diarrhoea
Pseudomembranous colitis (drug induced) Munchausen syndrome by proxy

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance

Fever Watery Blood, mucus Faecal white blood cell count Tenesmus

Physiological (breast-fed)

Toddler ‘Diarrhoea’

Viral GE (small bowel)

Bacterial Colitis

Milk Intolerance

No No No No No

No No No No No

Possible Yes No Possible No

Yes No Yes Yes Yes

No Yes Possible Possible No

Recommended Investigations \*\*\* Stool for culture (bacterial), and
antigen for viral cause (e.g. rotavirus) \*\* Testing the stool with a
Clinitest tablet for reducing substances to confirm lactose intolerance
\*\* Blood for U&E is indicated unless the diarrhoea is mild and there
is little or no dehydration

32

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

Top Tips • The principal complication from diarrhoea is dehydration. If
a child is alert and playful, the degree of dehydration is
insignificant. • Mothers are usually good historians. Urine frequency
and colour can give an important estimate of the degree of dehydration:
concentrated urine (orange colour) suggests mild dehydration, infrequent
and small amount of urine suggests moderate, and anuria means severe
dehydration. • Toddler’s diarrhoea (functional diarrhoea) is the most
common cause of chronic diarrhoea without failure to thrive. Excessive
fruit juice and fructose consumption may play a role in the
pathophysiology of this condition. • Diarrhoea persisting for longer
than 2 weeks (termed protracted or chronic diarrhoea) is mostly due to
milk lactose or protein intolerance. Temporary withdrawal of milk and
diary products is usually diagnostic and therapeutic. • Large watery
diarrhoea in association with diffuse abdominal pain and vomiting is
typical for enteritis (usually termed gastroenteritis), whereas small
frequent, bloody stools and lower abdominal pain are very suggestive of
colitis. • Major reduction in diarrhoea morbidity and mortality over the
past decades is due to oral rehydration solution, rotavirus vaccine and
zinc supplement. Probiotics may be beneficial. • The main causes of
protracted diarrhea are milk protein and lactose intolerance and CD. •
Polymer-based oral rehydration solution (ORS), using rice or wheat, has
advantages over ORS &lt;270 mOsm/L and ORS &gt;310 mOsm/L.

Red Flags • Beware of harmful practices in the management of diarrhoea
which include restriction of fluid, breastfeeding and food and
inappropriate medication use. • Toddler’s diarrhoea is common and should
not be misdiagnosed as GE. These children are healthy and thriving,
passing three to five soft stools daily, often containing undigested
food particles (e.g. carrots, peas). It is self-limiting and resolves
spontaneously when at school age. • Children with loose, frequent stools
may have an infection elsewhere, e.g. UTI or appendicitis. •
Laxative-induced diarrhoea (induced illness) is rare but should not be
missed. The diarrhoea is usually chronic or recurrent. The carer of the
child often has an underlying psychiatric disturbance.

FURTHER READING Carter E, Bryce J, Perin J et al. Harmful practices in
the management of childhood diarrhoea in low- and middle income
countries: A systematic review. BMC Public Health 2015;15:788. Greggoria
GV, Gonzales MM, Dans LF et al. Polymer-based oral rehydration solution
for treating acute watery diarrhoea. Cochrane Database Syst Rev
2016;(12):CD006519.

33

Abdomen

GASTROINTESTINAL BLEEDING (RECTAL BLEEDING) Clinical Overview
Gastrointestinal bleeding (GIB) is a common condition and can occur from
the mouth to the anus. It is classified as an upper GIB (oesophagus,
stomach and duodenum) originating proximal to the ligament of Treitz (at
the duodeno-jejunal junction), leading to haematemesis, coffee-ground
vomiting and black tarry stools (melena). This type of GIB is uncommon
in children but is potentially a life-threatening condition. Lower GIB
originating from areas below the ligament of Treitz (bowel, colon)
produces bright red blood that has not been in contact with gastric
juice. Bright blood mixed with loose stools suggests bleeding site above
the rectum (colitis, e.g. infectious or ulcerative colitis). Beyond the
neonatal period, anal fissures are the most common cause of rectal
bleeding. The child presents with painful defaecation and small blood
streaks on the surface of the stool.

Possible Diagnoses Infants

Children

Common Any cause of haematemesis Swallowed maternal blood Vitamin K
deficiency NEC Intussusception Drugs Cow’s milk protein Anal fissure
Thrombocytopenia Rare Volvulus Polyps Haemorrhagic diseases Haemangioma
Oesophagitis Duplication of bowel

Any cause of haematemesis Bacterial colitis Anal fissure
Thrombocytopenia HSP Colitis (e.g. ulcerative colitis) Meckel’s
diverticulum Peptic ulcer Intussusception

Drugs Peptic ulcer Swallowed blood (e.g. from epistaxis) Oesophagitis
Haemolytic uraemic syndrome IBD Mallory–Weiss syndrome Hereditary
haemorrhagic telangiectasia Angiodysplasia Hookworm infections

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance Diarrhoea Massive bleed Painless
bleed Vomiting Bright red blood

Infectious GE

Colitis

Gastric Ulcer

Intussusception

Meckel’s Diverticulum

Yes No Yes Yes Yes

Yes No Yes No Yes

No No No Possible No

No No Yes Yes Yes

No Yes No No Yes

34

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

Recommended Investigations \*\*\* Stool testing for occult blood to
confirm or exclude bleeding *** FBC: anaemia suggests chronic blood
loss; anaemia with high CRP suggests IBD; low platelets indicate
thrombocytopenia **  Liver function tests for suspected liver disease;
renal function test: high urea and creatinine suggest haemolytic-uraemic
syndrome ** Clotting study to evaluate coagulopathies such as
haemophilia **  Apt test to differentiate maternal from fetal blood
*** Stool culture to confirm infective colitis **  Abdominal plain
X-ray is useful in suspected cases of NEC and intussusception
\*\*\* Endoscopy is indicated in GIB, also therapeutically for e.g.
polyps, ulcer

Top Tips • Rectal bleeding in a healthy neonate is most often maternal
in origin, swallowed either during delivery or breastfeeding. •
Important factors in the differential diagnosis of GI bleeding: age of
the child, presence or absence of anal pain during blood passage, and
presence or absence of diarrhoea. • Meckel’s diverticulum should
strongly be suspected at any age if bleeding is massive and accompanied
by both bright and dark red stools. • Endoscopy is the method of choice
for evaluating GIB that should be performed within 24 hours of
presentation, after stabilization of the child. It has also a
therapeutic role for polyps and ulcers.

Red Flags • Remember that not all red or black stools contain blood;
iron, charcoal, licorice, blueberries and bismuth preparations can cause
a black appearance of a stool. • The abdominal pain in HSP may be severe
and can lead to laparotomy, particularly if it precedes the skin rash
and joint manifestations. Buttocks, arms and legs should be examined for
urticarial lesions or petechiae. • Children who present with persistent
or recurrent iron-deficiency anaemia and occult GIB should have the
stool checked for blood.

FURTHER READING Romano C, Oliva S, Martellossi S et al. Pediatric
gastrointestinal bleeding: Perspective from the Italian Society of
Pediatric Gastroenterology. World J Gastroenterol 2017;23(8):1328–1337.

35

Abdomen

JAUNDICE Clinical Overview Jaundice is very common during the neonatal
period: 60% of term and 80% of preterm babies become jaundiced with
indirect hyperbilirubinaemia (IHB) in the first few days of life, mainly
due to breakdown of red blood cells. Indirect bilirubin is fat soluble
and can cause brain damage and kernicterus. After the neonatal period,
infection remains the most common cause of jaundice worldwide. The
viruses that causes jaundice are hepatitis A, B, C, D and E virus,
cytomegalovirus, and Epstein–Barr–virus. Hepatitis A used to be a common
infection, but its incidence rate has declined significantly in
developed countries. It causes direct hyperbilirubinaemia (DHB).
Jaundice should be differentiated from xanthochromia (carotenaemia),
which is due to carotene deposits in the skin. The sclerae remain normal
(Figure 2.1).

FIGURE 2.1

Sclera in patient with jaundice.

Differential Diagnosis Infants

Children

Common Physiological Haemolytic (ABO incompatibility) Breast milk
Polycythaemia Parenteral hyperalimentation

Infectious hepatitis Drug-induced jaundice Mononucleosis Haemolytic
anaemia Gilbert syndrome

Rare Congenital spherocytosis Congenital hepatitis, cytomegalovirus
(CMV), rubella Toxoplasmosis, syphilis

Malaria Reye syndrome Autoimmune liver disease (Continued)

36

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter (Continued) Infants

Children

Biliary atresia Hypothyroidism Metabolic (e.g. galactosaemia)
Niemann-Pick disease Alagille syndrome

Wilson disease Yellow fever Cystic fibrosis Liver cirrhosis
Crigler-Najjar syndrome Lyme disease

α-1 Antitrypsin deficiency Cystic fibrosis

Q fever Leptospirosis Choledochal cyst Typhoid fever Wilson disease
Hepatic abscess Niemann-Pick disease

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance Infectious Hepatitis Drug Induced
Mononucleosis Gilbert Syndrome Haemolytic Anaemia Fever Anaemia
Splenomegaly Lymphadenopathy Abdominal pain

Yes No Possible Possible Yes

Possible Possible No No Possible

Yes No Yes Yes Possible

Possible No No No Yes

Possible Yes Possible No Possible

Recommended Investigations *** FBC: Hb low in haemolysis; leukocytosis
suggests infection; reticulocytosis suggests haemolysis *** Liver
functions tests should include total bilirubin and direct bilirubin (for
persistent ­jaundice longer than 2 weeks), alkaline phosphatase,
prothrombin time (PT), partial thromboplastin time (PTT), albumin
\*\*\* Blood group and Rh-status of the mother and infant, Coombs test
\*\* Tests for intrauterine infections (TORCH) \*\*  Thyroid function
tests to assess thyroid function \*\*\* Abdominal ultrasound scan: to
rule out bile obstruction (e.g. choledochal cyst) \*\*  Isotope scan
with technetium; percutaneous needle liver biopsy may occasionally be
indicated

Top Tips • Physiologic jaundice occurs in most neonates during the first
few days of life: it is not a disease, it is not present in the first 24
hours, and it is always an IHB. • Breast milk jaundice is physiologic
jaundice, which may persist for weeks in about 10% of breastfed babies.
Mothers should be encouraged to continue breastfeeding. • An infant or
toddler with yellow skin but normal white sclera has carotenaemia, not
jaundice. • Direct-reacting bilirubin is water soluble, not fat soluble,
and therefore does not damage the brain tissue to cause kernicterus. It
is, however, associated with serious diseases, such as congenital
hepatitis and biliary atresia. • In hepatocellular disease, there is a
disproportional increase of alanine aminotransferase (ALT) and aspartate
aminotransferase (AST) compared to alkaline phosphatase increase;

Abdomen

whereas in cholestatic diseases it is the opposite. ALT is present in
the liver, hence more specific than AST which is present in other
organs. • A healthy full-term baby without haemolysis will not get any
ill effect from a bilirubin &lt;400 µmol. • Gilbert syndrome is the most
common cause of indirect bilirubin jaundice in older children. It is a
benign condition; patients are usually asymptomatic. Jaundice becomes
apparent during fasting or stress. It should be differentiated from
haemolytic disease (by Hb, reticulocyte count). • Although hepatitis is
the most common cause of jaundice worldwide, jaundice occurs in as few
as 1 in 10 children with hepatitis A, 1 in 4 with hepatitis B, and in
less than 1 in 3 with hepatitis C.

Red Flags • Always measure serum bilirubin in babies with jaundice in
the first 24 hours of life. • Children with acute UTI present
occasionally with jaundice that may divert attention to hepatic disease,
causing delay in antibiotic administration. The infection can progress
to septicaemia. • Be aware that children with biliary atresia are
usually healthy looking and indistinguishable from those with
physiological jaundice during the first 2 weeks. • When jaundice lasts
more than more than 2 weeks, always measure direct bilirubin and ask for
‘pale chalky’ stools and/or dark urine that stain the nappy. These are
suggestive of biliary atresia. Absence of pale stools does not always
exclude biliary atresia. • Direct bilirubin more than 25 µmol/L (or 15%
of the total bilirubin) indicates serious disease and is never
physiologic. Causes include neonatal hepatitis secondary to congenital
infection (rubella, CMV, toxoplasmosis) or biliary atresia. • It is
vitally important to refer an infant with DHB as an emergency before
irreversible damage to the liver is done. The Kasai operation
(portoenterostomy) is successful (&gt;90%) if performed before 8 weeks
of life. Without Kasai operation (to drain bile from the liver into the
intestines) or liver transplantation, liver failure ensues within a year
and death within 2 years.

FURTHER READING Wang KS. Newborn screening for biliary atresia.
Pediatrics 2015;136(6):e1663–e1669.

37

38

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

VOMITING Clinical Overview Vomiting is included in the recent
terminology of functional gastrointestinal disorders (FGIDs), which are
chronic or refractory symptoms without structural or biochemical
abnormalities. These include infant regurgitation, infant colic, cyclic
vomiting and functional nausea and vomiting. Vomiting is a forceful
action accomplished by a downward contraction of the diaphragm, along
with tightening of the abdominal muscles against an open sphincter,
propelling gastric contents out. Unlike vomiting, regurgitation
indicates discharge of gastric contents without effort and nausea.
Retching signals the beginning of vomiting. These steps are coordinated
by the medullary vomiting centre, which receives afferent signals from
the GI tract, bloodstream, equilibrium system of the inner ear and
central nervous system (CNS). Because vomiting is a common symptom in
children, it should be evaluated in the clinical context with other
associated symptoms. Clinicians should be in a position to determine the
degree of seriousness of vomiting. In this section, only vomiting as a
major symptom is discussed.

Possible Diagnoses Infants Common GO reflux Swallowed blood or fluid
during delivery Systemic infection Intestinal obstruction Pyloric
stenosis

Children

Gastroenteritis Systemic infection (e.g. pneumonia, UTI) Medications
(e.g. chemotherapy) GO reflux Migraine

Rare Overfeeding Overfeeding (mainly in prematurity) Milk
protein/lactose intolerance Inborn errors of metabolism (e.g.
galactosaemia) Sepsis Oesophageal atresia Intussusception Subdural
haematoma Rumination Cyclic vomiting

Appendicitis Meningitis Postoperative Periodic syndrome (cyclic
vomiting) Intestinal obstruction Increased intracranial pressure (CNS
tumour) Pertussis IBD Peptic ulcer Eating disorders (bulimia) Norovirus
Head injury Pancreatitis Inborn errors of metabolism Renal or biliary
colic

39

Abdomen

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance Diarrhoea Positive family history
Thriving With fever Acute onset

Gastroenteritis

Systemic Infections

GO Reflux

Migraine

Medication

Yes Possible Possible Possible Yes

Possible No Yes Yes Yes

No No Possible No No

No Yes Yes No Yes

Possible No Yes No Yes

Recommended Investigations Investigation should be directed according to
the history and clinical findings. \*\* Urine for reducing substance for
suspected galactosaemia \*\* Blood for FBC, CRP, U&E for persistent
vomiting ** Blood glucose, blood gases, amino acids, lactate, carnitine
for inborn errors of metabolism ** Abdominal and chest X-ray is useful
in intestinal obstruction \*\* Abdominal ultrasound scan to confirm
cases of pyloric stenosis

Top Tips • GO reflux is common in infants and refers to the involuntary
passage of gastric contents into the oesophagus, which is a normal
phenomenon occurring many times a day in both children and adults.
Reflux occurs commonly in infants because of liquid milk-based diet,
recumbent position and immaturity of the GO junction. • Norovirus is a
common cause of vomiting and gastroenteritis (GE). After the
introduction of rotavirus vaccines, norovirus is the leading cause of GE
in children younger than 5 years of age. • The vast majority of infants
with GO reflux do well aged 6–12 months; few develop c­omplications
including oesophagitis, aspiration pneumonia and abnormal neck and head
posturing (Sandifer syndrome). The condition is then termed GO reflux
disease. • Pyloric stenosis is differentiated from GO reflux by
projectile vomiting in the first 2–3 weeks of life in a baby who is
hungry with visible gastric peristalsis and a palpation of an ‘olive’ in
the right upper quadrant. With reflux, children vomit during or
immediately after feeding. • Once a pyloric tumour is palpated in the
abdomen (present in about 50% of cases), this is pathognomonic for the
disease. If in doubt, an ultrasound is a very useful tool in experienced
hands. A thickness of &gt;4 mm suggests the diagnosis. • Cyclic vomiting
is characterised by current (three attacks in 6 months or five attacks
in any time) vomiting with symptom-free intervals. A family history of
migraine supports the diagnosis. • Anti-emetics are rarely used in
paediatrics; finding the underlying cause of the vomiting is far more
important than spending time selecting an anti-emetic. Exceptions
include chemotherapy-induced vomiting and persistent vomiting in
migraine.

40

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

Red Flags • Although dehydration is the main complication of vomiting,
particularly in infants and young children, hypochloraemic hypokalaemic
alkalosis and bleeding from tears in the distal oesophagus may occur
with recurrent forceful vomiting. • Bilious vomiting may occur after an
hour or two after any repeated vomiting and retching, but it usually
suggests intestinal obstruction requiring immediate medical attention. •
Beware that pain usually precedes vomiting in appendicitis and
intestinal obstruction. • Not all vomiting with headache is migraine; a
CNS lesion such as brain tumour must be excluded. • Vomiting causes
metabolic alkalosis; vomiting causing metabolic acidosis is suggestive
of gastroenteritis or inborn error of metabolism. • Cyclic vomiting (CV)
is often misdiagnosed as gastroenteritis or GO reflux. Conditions
mimicking CV include mitochondrial disorders, fatty acid oxidation
disorder and organic aciduria. Elevated lactate and metabolic acidosis
are important clues. • Consider inborn errors of metabolism in the
differential diagnosis of any severely ill neonate who presents with
poor feeding, lethargy, vomiting and convulsion in early life. The
condition is often lethal unless prompt treatment is initiated.

FURTHER READING Chow S, Goldman RD. Treating children cyclic vomiting.
Can Fam Physician 2007;53(3):417–419.

41

Abdomen

VOMITING BLOOD (HAEMATEMESIS) Clinical Overview GIB may originate
anywhere from the mouth to the anus. Upper gastrointestinal bleeding
(UGIB) is much less common in children than in adults because of rarity
of GI cancers. Haematemesis, with or without melaena, usually indicates
a bleed from a site proximal to the ligament of Treitz of the duodenum
(duodeno-jejunal junction). Haematochezia refers to distal bleeding.
When haematemesis is caused by brisk bleeding, it usually indicates an
arterial source. Coffee-ground emesis results from blood altered by
gastric acid and usually means that the bleeding has slowed or stopped.
The causes of haematemesis vary according to the age of the child and
whether there are other associated symptoms. Haematemesis (usually
associated with nausea, act of vomiting, pain and possible tenderness of
the abdomen) must be differentiated from haemoptysis (associated with
cough, frothy colour, crackle noises on lung auscultation and evidence
of pulmonary disease) and swallowed epistaxis (blood present in the
nose, dripping into the posterior nasopharynx).

Possible Diagnoses Infants

Children

Common Swallowed maternal blood (during birth) Swallowed blood from
cracked nipple Oesophagitis secondary to GO reflux NEC Blood disorders
(e.g. thrombocytopenia) Rare Coagulation disorder DIC Meckel’s
diverticulum Haemophilia

Drugs Gastritis Mallory–Weiss tear (MWT) Oesophagitis (GO reflux)
Swallowed blood (e.g. epistaxis)

Oesophageal varices (usually large haematemesis) Gastric erosion or
ulcer Thrombocytopenia Swallowing of foreign body Gastric vascular
malformation Haemophilia Gastric tumour

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance Associated pain Preceded by vomiting
Prior severe retching Massive bleeding Affects infancy

Drugs

Gastritis

MWT

GO Reflux

Swallowed Blood

Possible Possible No Possible Possible

Yes Possible No Possible Possible

Possible Yes Yes Yes No

Yes Yes No No Yes

No No No No No

Recommended Investigations \*\*\* FBC: anaemia suggests chronic blood
loss or large blood loss; thrombocytopenia \*\*\* Coagulation studies:
PT, PTT, clotting factors and LFTs \*\*\* Apt test: maternal (blood
turns yellow-brown) or fetal: blood remains pink

42

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

\*\*\* Abdominal plain X-ray useful for NEC, or foreign body \*\*\*
Abdominal ultrasound scan for suspected intussusception \*\*\* Endoscopy
for upper GI bleed

Tip Tops • In haematemesis, the history usually suggests the likely
diagnosis and tests are often not required. • Causes of haematemesis are
age dependent: in neonates it is mostly caused by swallowed maternal
blood; in infancy it is mostly caused by drugs or reflux oesophagitis;
in older children it is mostly caused by drugs, MWT, oesophageal varices
(portal hypertension) or peptic ulcer. • UGIB may present with
haematemesis alone, with melaena alone or a combination of both. • MWT
was described in 1929 in association with alcohol bingeing; it is not
that common in children. GO reflux remains one of the most common causes
of this tear. • In a baby with haematemesis, inspection of the mother’s
breast or expressed milk suggests the diagnosis, and it is confirmed by
Apt-test performed on blood aspirated from the stomach. • Vomiting blood
may be bright red or dark and resemble coffee grounds; the latter
indicates digestion of blood by gastric juice.

Red Flags • Stabilisation of the child with open airway and blood
transfusion is urgent. The child may rapidly deteriorate, leading to
circulatory collapse. • When a newborn has haematemesis or melaena,
consider if he or she was not given vitamin K. • Haemoglobin on
admission may not reflect the true haemoglobin level or the blood loss,
and therefore frequent Hb check is recommended. • Haematemesis caused by
medications, particularly non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
(NSAIDs), is underreported and underestimated; it is always worth taking
a detailed history of recent intake of drugs. The condition is often
misdiagnosed as ‘viral gastritis’. • Aspirin should not be given to
children (except in certain indications, e.g. Kawasaki disease). Parents
may not be aware that many over-the-counter cough remedies and
analgesics contain aspirin. • MWT (linear laceration at the GO junction)
may occur after a single episode of vomiting. Children with portal
hypertension are at high risk of this tear.

FURTHER READING Nasher O, Devadason D, Stewart RJ et al. Upper
gastrointestinal bleeding in children: A tertiary United Kingdom
children’s hospital experience. Children (Basel). 4(11), 2017.
doi:10.3390/children4110095

3

SYSTEMIC PHYSICAL CONDITION

CRYING, EXCESSIVE (INCLUDING BABY COLIC) Clinical Overview When crying
is inconsolable and excessive, it can cause stress to parents, disrupt
parenting and, in rare cases, place an infant at risk for abuse. It is
common and normal for infants to cry up to 2 hours a day. Infantile
colic is not a diagnosis; it is simply a term that describes healthy
infants with p­ aroxysmal excessive crying for no apparent reason,
presumably of intestinal origin, during the first 3–4 months. It is
defined as crying for over 3 hours a day, over 3 days a week and over 3
weeks. It usually begins aged 2 weeks and significantly improves by the
age of 3–4 months. Characteristically, the attack begins suddenly, is
continuous, with flushed face, tense abdomen, hands making fists and
drawing up of legs. Around 5% of cases have organic causes. Crying may
be a baby’s way of communication; as children grow older, they find
different ways to communicate.

Possible Diagnoses Infants

Children

Common Colic (evening colic) Discomfort (too warm or too cold, nappy
rash) Gastro-oesophageal (GO) reflux Infection (e.g. otitis media
\[OM\]) Milk and food allergy/intolerance

Pain (e.g. abdominal pain) Food intolerance (including milk intolerance)
GO reflux Infection (e.g. OM) Night terror

Rare Non-accidental injury Intestinal obstruction (e.g. intussusception)
Constipation Teething Maternal migraine

Non-accidental injury Intestinal obstruction (e.g. intussusception)
Renal stones or gallstone Migraine

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance Short history Associated vomiting
Within 6 months of age Symptoms mainly evening Effective therapy
available

Colic

GO Reflux

Food Intolerance

Infection

Night Terror

No No Yes Yes No

No Yes Yes No Yes

Possible Possible Possible No Yes

Yes No No No Yes

No No No Yes No

43

44

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

Recommended Investigations The following tests are sometimes required:
*** ** *** **\* \*\*

Urinalysis to exclude urinary tract infection (UTI) Full blood count
(FBC) and C-reactive protein (CRP) for infection such as appendicitis
Plain X-ray of abdomen for intestinal obstruction, e.g. intussusception
Abdominal ultrasound scan for renal or gallbladder stone intestinal
obstruction pH study to confirm GO reflux

Top Tips • Colic typically is noted more in the afternoon and evening
(commonly 6–10 p.m.), suggesting that events at home (e.g. parent is
busy with household; child being left alone) could be the major cause.
Evening colic used to be the most common diagnosis of infantile colic;
this is being replaced by GO reflux. • Persistent crying beyond 4 months
of age has been associated with long-term psychological and behavioural
problems, including hyperactivity and migraine. • GO reflux is
considered physiological when the infant thrives with some
posseting/­vomiting. When GO reflux is causing complications, e.g.
irritability, disrupted sleep, choking, aspiration pneumonia and/or poor
weight gain, it is termed GO reflux disease. • Although several
over-the-counter preparations are used for colic (gripe water, Infacol,
Dentinox), they are scientifically not proven. • A sympathetic and
supportive clinician who has time to listen to parental concerns of
excessive crying is a prerequisite for successful management. • Sedation
or temporary hospital admission is occasionally required for babies with
e­ xcessive crying. This is done if other measures fail and often for a
maternal indication, i.e. to give relief to an exhausted mother.

Red Flags • The diagnosis of colic should not be made without excluding
more serious disorders such as otitis media or intussusception. • A
child who develops severe paroxysmal abdominal pain after the age of 3–4
months should be examined to exclude organic causes, e.g. UTI or
intussusception. • Beware that the fontanelle can be bulging when the
baby is crying; if it remains so after cessation of crying, this sign is
serious and occurs in meningitis or hydrocephalus. • The administration
of a sedative to a child with persistent crying may mask an underlying
abdominal pathology; it should be the last resort. • Be aware of the
possibility of non-accidental injury for unexplained baby crying. Check
the baby’s weight (failure to thrive?); check for any bruises in the
skin. • Early increase in crying in a healthy infant is the most common
stimulus for shaken baby syndrome (abusive head trauma). This is a
potentially lethal form of physical abuse causing brain injury, e.g.
subdural haematoma, with 80% significant brain injury and 20% death.

FURTHER READING Barr RG. Preventing abusive head trauma resulting from a
failure of normal interaction between infants and their caregivers. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 2012;109(Suppl 2):17294–17301. Dahlen HG, Foster JP,
Psalia K et al. Gastro-oesophageal reflux: A mixed methods study of
infants admitted to hospital in the first 12 months following birth in
NSW. BMC Pediatr 2018;18:30. Zeevenhooven J, Koppen IJN, Benninga MA.
The new Rome IV criteria for functional gastrointestinal ­disorders in
infants and toddlers. Pediatr Gastroenterol Hepatol Nutr
2017;20(1):1–13.

45

Systemic Physical Condition

FAILURE TO THRIVE AND WEIGHT LOSS Clinical Overview Although there is no
agreement about a definition of failure to thrive (FTT), a child whose
weight is well below the third percentile (or more accurately if the
weight is below 0.4 percentile on the 9 percentile chart) or a weight
loss that has crossed two percentiles should be considered as FTT. It is
a descriptive term, not a diagnosis, with peak incidence occurring in
children 1–2 years of age. FFT is divided into two main categories:
organic and non-organic causes. Globally, malnutrition/ under-nutrition
is the most common cause of FTT. In children living in high-income
countries, psychosocial causes are far more common than organic causes.
If the history and physical examination do not suggest a specific
underlying organic disease, psychosocial causes are likely and
laboratory tests and imaging are unlikely to provide the answer.

Possible Diagnoses Infants

Children

Common Small for date Neglect Milk allergy Malnutrition Malabsorption
Rare GO reflux Inborn errors of metabolism Chronic diarrhoea Prematurity
Chronic diseases CNS tumour

Psychosocial (e.g. emotional deprivation) Eating disorder (e.g. anorexia
nervosa) Chronic infection (e.g. HIV, parasitic) Malnutrition and
under-nutrition (from poverty) Malabsorption (e.g. coeliac disease)

Malignancy Depression, anxiety Inflammatory bowel diseases GO reflux
Induced illness (Munchausen by proxy) Inborn errors of metabolism CNS
tumour

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance Psychological (Neglect) Diagnostic
history Peak 1–2 years of age Abnormal stools Abnormal physical
examination Reduced activity

Eating Disorder

Chronic Infections

Malnutrition

Malabsorption

Yes Yes No No

Possible No No No

Possible Possible Possible Possible

Yes Yes Possible Yes

Yes Yes Yes Yes

Possible

Possible

Possible

Possible

No

Recommended Investigations \*\*\* Urine: proteinuria in renal disease
\*\*\* FBC: Low haemoglobin suggests anaemia in malnutrition, infection
and malabsorption \*\* Serum albumin \*\*  Inflammatory markers (CRP or
erythrocyte sedimentation rate \[ESR\]): elevated in infectious diseases

46

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

\*\*\* TFTs will confirm hyperthyroidism \*\*\* Coeliac screening tests
in blood \*\*\* Consider cranial MRI if no cause for weight loss has
been identified

Top Tips • Small-for-gestational-age babies (weight less than the 10th
percentile for gestational age) dated from the first trimester
(symmetrically affecting the height and head circumference \[HC\] as
well) often remain underweight. They should not be categorised as FTT. •
Malabsorption is characterised by diarrhoea of greater than four stools
a day and/or steatorrhoea, i.e., fat content in stool &gt;4 g a day for
infant, and &gt;6–8 g in older children. • Neglect, whether nutritional
or emotional, is the most common cause of underweight in infancy and may
account for more than 50% of cases with FTT. • Community paediatricians
have a central role in the care of children with chronic illness and in
supporting their families. The main role of paediatricians is
establishing a diagnosis and arranging referrals to subspecialties and
other medical facilities. • Depressive disorder is not uncommon in
adolescents, who may show either a decrease or an increase in weight.

Red Flags • Children who were small for their gestational age often have
slow weight gain during the first 1–3 years of life. They have to be
differentiated from those who have gained weight and then experience
weight loss. The latter group should be taken very seriously. • Be aware
of children at a high risk of abuse: excessive crying during infancy,
physical handicap, chronic illness, with behavioural or learning
difficulties. • Early detection of psychosocial problems (e.g. neglect)
is very important because it can result not only in poor physical growth
but also in poor cognitive and intellectual development. • Neglected
children returning to their parents without any medical or social
intervention may face serious re-injury (in about 25%) or death (in
about 5%). • Weight loss in adolescent girls is likely to be due to
eating disorder. Diagnosis can be ­difficult in the early stages. Asking
about attitude toward eating and weight will suggest the diagnosis.

FURTHER READING Ross E, Munoz FM, Edem B et al. Failure to thrive: Case
definition and guidelines for data collection, analysis and presentation
of maternal immunisation safety data. Vaccine 2017;35(48):6483–6491.
Rudolf M, Logan S. What is the long term outcome for children who fail
to thrive? A systematic review. Arch Dis Child 2005;90(9):925–931.

47

Systemic Physical Condition

POSTOPERATIVE FEVER Clinician Overview Postoperative fever is defined as
a temperature greater than 38°C on two consecutive postoperative days,
or 39°C on any postoperative day. Fever during the postoperative period
is common, occurring in 25%–50% of cases. The magnitude of fever is
correlated with the extent of the surgery, i.e. minor surgery is rarely
associated with fever. Early postoperative fever (within 48 hours
postoperatively) is often caused by the trauma of the surgery. Infection
is the cause of fever in about 10%–25% of febrile postoperative
patients, usually occurring after 48 hours. Fever usually lasts longer
than 2 days (unless treated with antibiotics) tends to be higher than
39°C, and is associated with ill appearance.

Possible Diagnoses Infants

Children

Common Dehydration High ambient temperature Septicaemia Intravenous line
infection Haematoma

Dehydration Wound infection Transfusion or drug reaction Haematoma
Pneumonia

Rare Infectious diarrhoea Urinary tract infection (UTI) Osteomyelitis
Pulmonary atelectasis

Haematoma UTI Bacteraemia

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance Dehydration

Wound infection

Transfusion/ drug reaction

Haematoma

Pneumonia

No Yes Yes No No

Possible No Possible Yes Yes

No Yes Possible No Possible

No No No Yes Possible

Yes No Yes No Yes

High fever Fever on day one of surgery Ill appearance Diagnosis by
seeing surgical site Leukocytosis & high CRP

Recommended Investigation **  Urine culture **\* Full blood count
**  Liver function tests **\* Blood culture **  Chest X-ray **  Viral
studies: occasionally requested if the fever persists \*\*  CT scan
and/or ultrasonography: sometimes required for detecting intra-abdominal
abscess

48

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

Top Tips • Physical examination should focus on sites most likely to be
the cause of fever, including the operative site, abdomen (for
distension, tenderness, absence of bowel sounds) and upper respiratory
tract for infection and lung auscultation. • The diagnosis of
non-infectious causes should only be considered after excluding
infectious causes. • Factors that increase the likelihood of infection
include long postoperative stay in hospital, fever commencing on the
third postoperative day or later and fever over 39°C that persists or
has a hectic pattern, and the presence of intravascular catheter, the
prolonged use of naso-gastric or endotracheal tube, indwelling urinary
catheter or shunt.

Red Flags • Beware that serious infection may exist in the absence of
fever; this is usually the case during the neonatal period and in
immunosuppressed children. • The importance of postoperative fever
exists in the possibility of infection, which can lead to death if not
properly treated. • Although most postoperative fevers are
non-infectious, patients should be treated with antibiotics if they
appear unwell, the source of the fever is obscured or there is
leukocytosis with high CRP. • Before embarking on performing tests for
postoperative fever, remember that the most common source of infectious
fever is wound infection.

FURTHER READING Gupta AK, Singh VK, Varma A. Approach to postoperative
fever in pediatric cardiac patients. Ann Pediatr Cardiol
2012;5(1):61–68.

49

Systemic Physical Condition

RECURRENT FEVER (PERIODIC AND RELAPSING FEVER) Clinician Overview
Periodic fever (PF) and relapsing fever (ReF) are characterized by
episodes of fever recurring at regular or irregular intervals; each
episode is followed by one to several days, weeks or months of normal
temperature. Examples are seen in malaria, brucellosis, familial
Mediterranean fever (FMF) and PFAPA (periodic fever, aphthous
stomatitis, pharyngitis, and cervical adenitis). ReF is recurrent fever
caused by numerous species of Borrelia and transmitted by lice
(louse-borne ReF) or ticks (tick-borne ReF). Familial cold urticaria
syndrome (FCUS), Muckle–Wells syndrome (MWS), TNF-receptor associated
periodic syndrome (TRAPS) and hyperimmunoglobulinemia D syndrome (HIDS)
are also characterized by recurrent episodes of fever but they are rare
compared with FMF.

Possible Diagnoses Infants

Children

Common FMF Brucellosis Malaria MWS Cyclic neutropenia

Malaria Brucellosis FMF PFAPA Cyclic neutropenia

Rare FCUS

FCUS TRAPS MWS HIDS

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance Inheritance Periodic fever 3–6 weeks
Mouth ulcers Myalgia/arthralgia Prevalent in Mediterranean area

Malaria

Brucellosis

FMF

PFAPA

Cyclic neutropenia

No No No Yes Possible

No No No Yes Yes

Yes Yes No Yes Yes

Yes Yes Yes No No

Yes Yes Yes No No

Recommended Investigation \*\*\* FBC: neutropenia &lt; 1000 will confirm
cyclic neutropenia. \*\*\* IgD is elevated in HIDS and in the majority
of cases of PFAPA. \*\*\* Giemsa-stained smear for malaria, serological
test for brucellosis. \*\*  CRP and ESR: usually elevated.

50

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

Top Tips • Genetic causes of periodic fever syndromes have been
identified in the past few years. The term auto-inflammatory disease has
been proposed to describe a group of disorders characterized by attacks
of unprovoked systemic inflammation without significant levels of
autoimmune or infective causes. • FMF occurs in individuals from
Mediterranean ancestry who usually present with loss of appetite and
abdominal pain due to peritonitis. About 6–10 hours later, fever occurs
and rapid recovery ensues within 24–72 hours. • Pel–Ebstein fever was
originally thought to be characteristic of Hodgkin’s lymphoma (HL). Only
a few patients with Hodgkin’s disease develop this pattern, but when
present, it is suggestive of HD. The pattern consists of recurrent
episodes of fever lasting 3–10 days, followed by an afebrile period of
similar duration. • Episodes of fever, aphthous stomatitis, pharyngitis
and cervical adenopathy (PFAPA) are the most common clinical features of
auto-inflammatory disease. Each episode is followed by a symptom-free
interval ranging from weeks to months. • Patients with FMF usually
respond dramatically to colchicine at 0.6 mg hourly for 4 doses, which
is also effective in preventing attacks of FMF and the development of
amyloidosis. For those with PFAPA, steroid therapy is very effective in
controlling fever and other symptoms within 2–4 hours. Immunoglobulin-D
(IgD) is elevated in the majority of cases of PFAPA.

Red Flags • Amyloidosis commonly complicates FMF. Proteinuria is often
the clue of the disease. The best site to confirm the diagnosis is
biopsy from the gingiva or rectum, not from kidney or spleen. • Cyclic
neutropenia, autosomal dominant, is characterized by pharyngitis, mouth
ulcers and lymphadenitis. It is easily diagnosed by recognizing the
periodicity of symptoms and neutropenia. • The resolution of febrile
episode in periodic fever may be accompanied within a few hours (6–8
hours) by the Jarisch–Herxheimer reaction (JHR), which usually follows
antibiotic treatment. The reaction is caused by the release of endotoxin
when the organisms are destroyed by antibiotics. JHR is very common
after treating patients with syphilis.

FURTHER READING Soon GS, Laxer RM. Approach to recurrent fever in
childhood. Can Fam Physician 2017;63(10):756–762.

51

Systemic Physical Condition

TIREDNESS/FATIGUE Clinical Overview Everyone experiences fatigue, but
recovery is rapid following a rest or a good sleep. Most ­childhood
diseases, particularly infections, cause fatigue, which may last for
many days and sometimes weeks. Chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS) is defined
as an unexplained, persistent and overwhelming ­tiredness, weakness or
exhaustion causing disruption of daily life and resulting in a decrease
of physical and/or mental work, unrelieved by sleep. The condition
typically exacerbates with exercise or physical activity. A minimum of 3
months is required before diagnosis is made. CFS is rare before the age
of 10 years.

Possible Diagnoses Infants

Children

Common Chronic respiratory diseases Cardiac diseases Drugs (e.g.
anti-epileptics) Neuromuscular diseases Chronic infection/inflammation
Rare Malnutrition/chronic anaemia Botulism Malignancy Obstructive sleep
apnoea Hypokalaemia

CFS Post-viral fatigue Drugs (e.g. antihistamine, anti-epileptics)
Psychiatric illness (e.g. depression, anxiety disorder) Trauma
(post-traumatic stress, child abuse)

Autoimmune disease, for example, juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA)
Neuromuscular diseases (e.g. myasthenia gravis) Obstructive sleep apnoea
Chronic infectious/inflammatory diseases Malnutrition/chronic anaemia
Endocrine disorders (e.g. Addison’s, hypothyroidism) Malignancy (e.g.
lymphoma, neuroblastoma) Fibromyalgia Inflammatory bowel diseases (e.g.
Crohn’s disease) HIV infection Hypokalaemia

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance Preceded by viral infection Fatigue
as the main symptom Symptoms longer than 3 months Rest relieves fatigue
Normal physical examination

CFS

Post-Viral

Drugs

Psychiatric

Trauma

Possible Yes Yes No Possible

Yes Yes No Possible Possible

No No No Yes Possible

No No No Possible Yes

No No No Possible Yes

Recommended Investigations \*\*\* Urine: for renal abnormalities, for
example, chronic renal failure and tubular acidosis \*\*\* FBC:
Haemoglobin for chronic anaemia and infection; white blood cell (WBC)
count for infection

52

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

\*\*\* U&E: in renal failure and hypokalaemia \*\*\* Liver function
tests (LFTs) for chronic infection, jaundice, anaemia \*\*\* TFTs to
confirm hypothyroidism, cortisol level for suspected Addison’s disease
\*\*\* Creatine phosphokinase for suspected muscle disease \*\*\*
Serology for coeliac disease, toxoplasmosis, Lyme disease \*\*
 Serological or polymerase chain reaction studies for cytomegalovirus,
EBV, Toxoplasma gondii \*\*\* IgM for toxoplasmosis, Epstein–Barr virus
(EBV), cytomegalovirus (CMV) \*\* Viral tests for EBV-IgM and IgG \*\*\*
Mantoux test for suspected tuberculosis (TB) \*\*\* Chest X-ray for
suspected lymphoma

Top Tips • CFS should be differentiated from post-viral fatigue; the
latter is of short duration. A ­history of a viral infection at onset
and laboratory evidence support the diagnosis of ­post-viral fatigue. •
Children with autoimmune diseases (e.g. JIA or SLE) commonly suffer from
fatigue for months and years even after the disease has settled. •
Childhood trauma causes sometimes a long-term fatigue. Trauma is defined
as exposure to actual or threatening death, serious injury or sexual
violence. This includes experiencing a direct trauma, witnessing it or
learning about it. • While fibromyalgia is characterised by widespread
musculoskeletal pain (generalised or localised), joint tenderness and to
a lesser extent fatigue, in CFS the fatigue is prominent, overshadowing
other symptoms. • In myasthenia gravis, the fatigue is
characteristically late in the day or after exercise; ptosis is a
typical presentation. • CFS can be an extremely isolating illness.
Establishing contacts with a support group can be very helpful for
overcoming isolation and providing contact with similar-aged patients. A
child is best managed in CFS centres, which are led by CFS specialists.

Red Flags • Diagnosis of CFS should not be made in patients with prior
history of depressive or ­psychotic disorder such as schizophrenia. •
Patients with CSF have often sleep disturbance; a good history of the
sleep pattern is essential. • Be aware that one of the most common and
distressing side effects of cancer treatment is fatigue, occurring in up
to 99% of cases. Aerobic exercise, physical activity and yoga are
beneficial, not prescribing psychostimulants. • Childhood trauma that
includes sexual violence and maltreatment (physical, emotional and
neglect) has detrimental effects on the cognitive and brain development
of the child. Only 22% of children who had been abused or neglected
achieved healthy adult functioning.

FURTHER READING De Bellis MD, Zisk A. The biological effects of
childhood trauma. Child Adolesc Psychiatr Clin N Am 2014;23(2):185–222.
Rowe PC, Ra U, Friedman KJ et al. Myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic
fatigue syndrome diagnosis and ­management in young people: A primer.
Front Pediatr 2017;5:121.

53

Systemic Physical Condition

UNEXPLAINED AND PERSISTENT FEVER Clinical Overview Fever without focus
(FWF) is defined as an acute febrile illness without apparent source
that lasts for less than a week, with the history and physical
examination failing to find the cause. About 20% of all febrile episodes
demonstrate no localising signs on presentation. The most common cause
is a viral infection that should be considered only after excluding UTI
and bacteraemia. Persistent fever (pyrexia) of unknown origin (PUO) is
defined as fever without localising signs that persists for over 1 week
during which evaluation fails to detect the cause. Infections are the
most common causes, accounting for 60%–70% of all cases, of which about
15% are due to viral infection. Collagen diseases account for about 20%,
of which the most common cause is JIA as a pre-arthritic presentation.
Malignancy presenting as fever without other manifestations may occur in
up to 5%. Miscellaneous diagnoses account for 5%–10% and undiagnosed in
the remaining 5%. Previously, a high percentage of PUO (up to 25%) was
categorised as undiagnosed, but the percentage of undiagnosed cases has
greatly decreased.

Possible Diagnoses Infants

Children

Common Maternal fever Viral infection UTI Occult bacteraemia Occult
abscess

Viral infection (e.g. Human herpesvirus 6 \[HHV-6\]) UTI Occult
bacteraemia Collagen diseases (e.g. JIA, SLE) Parasitic infections (e.g.
malaria, Lyme disease)

Rare Drug fever Malaria Periodic and relapsing fever Occult abscess
Meningitis Anhidrotic ectodermal dysplasia

Drug fever Sinusitis Periodic and relapsing fever Occult abscess Dengue
fever Subacute thyroiditis (de Quervain’s disease) Neoplasms
Inflammatory bowel disease

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance

Well appearing Fever 38°C–39°C Persists longer than 1 week More
prevalent in females than in males High WBC, CRP

Viral Infection

UTI

Bacteraemia

Collagen Disease

Parasitic Infection

Yes Yes No No No

Possible Possible No Yes Yes

Possible No No No Yes

Yes No Yes Yes Possible

Possible Possible Yes No Possible

54

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

Recommended Investigations \*\*\* Urine: dipsticks may show positive
nitrite that is highly sensitive for UTI \*\*\* FBC: leukocytosis and
high CRP suggest bacterial infection, e.g. bacteraemia or UTI \*\*\* BC:
for highly febrile children (&gt;39°C) *** Anti-nuclear antibodies: for
autoimmune diseases such as juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA) ** LFTs,
serum albumin: globulin ratio *\*\* Thick and thin peripheral film for
suspected malaria \*\* Abdominal ultrasound scan looking for any hidden
abscess in case of PUO \*\*\* Tuberculin test \*\* Chest X-ray for
possible TB; CT scan for sinuses \*\* Echocardiography for vegetation in
endocarditis \*\* Isotope bone scan: to look for any osteomyelitic focus
or tumour \*\* Virological studies, including polymerase chain reaction
testing \*\* Serology for brucellosis, toxoplasmosis, CMV, EBV,
salmonella

Top Tips • Children with a viral infection are likely to appear well,
with good eye contact, a reasonable level of activity, not dehydrated,
and eating and drinking satisfactorily. • Exanthema subitum (caused by
HH-6; Figure 3.1) is the most common febrile exanthem in children
younger than 3 years, occurring in about 30% of children. Onset of fever
is abrupt and characteristically continuous, often as high as 40°C–41°C,
and without a focus. Characteristically, the child becomes well and
afebrile when the rash erupts. • The patient’s history should be
searched for animal exposure, travel abroad, prior use of antibiotics,
ingestion of raw milk, exposure to infection and consideration of ethnic
group. • Repeated physical examinations are more helpful in establishing
a diagnosis than extensive investigations. A child with the initial
diagnosis of PUO on presentation may often prove to have either a
self-limiting benign disorder, such as viral infection (fever being the
only sign of the disease), or a common disease with atypical
presentation. • Eye examination is essential and may suggest the
diagnosis: bulbar conjunctivitis s­ uggests Kawasaki’s disease or
leptospirosis; palpebral conjunctivitis may suggest TB, ­glandular fever
or cat-scratch fever; petechial conjunctival haemorrhage suggests
endocarditis;

FIGURE 3.1

Exanthema subitum.

Systemic Physical Condition

uveitis as an early clue for JRA or sarcoidosis; chorioretinitis
suggests toxoplasmosis, syphilis, or CMV. • Factitious fever, although
rare, is an important cause of PUO (incidence: 1%–2% of causes of PUO).
Measurement of temperature by a nurse attending to the procedure is
essential to eliminate the rare possibility. • Fever of neoplastic
origin usually does not respond to antipyretics such as paracetamol, but
it does respond to indomethacin or naproxen. Naproxen causes a prompt
and complete lysis of neoplastic fever with sustained normal temperature
(Naproxen test); Naproxen is therefore useful in the differential
diagnosis between neoplastic and infectious fevers.

Red Flags • Although viral infections account for the vast majority of
causes of fever (90%–95%), ­children younger than 3 months of age, with
immune deficiency (e.g. HIV or on chemotherapy), sickle-cell anaemia
(SCA), cystic fibrosis (CF), asplenia, and with body t­emperature higher
than 40°C should be considered as having bacterial infections until
proven otherwise, and treatment with antibiotics should be commenced
without waiting for laboratory results. • Infants younger than 3 months
of age and ill-appearing infants and children should be hospitalised,
their urine and blood cultured, and they should receive IV ceftriaxone
or cefotaxime. Those with fever higher than 39.0°C should be screened
with blood WBC and CRP. • Always remember that normal body temperature
does not preclude serious bacterial infection.

FURTHER READING El-Radhi AS. Clinical Manual of Fever in Children. New
York, NY: Springer, 2018.

55

56

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

WEIGHT GAIN, EXCESSIVE (OBESITY) Clinical Overview Obesity is a common
and serious problem in children. Its incidence has increased
dramatically since 1970, and this rate is likely to continue. Overweight
is defined as a body mass index (BMI) of greater than the 85th to less
than the 95th centile, and obesity as greater than 95th for children. It
is linked to adult obesity with the potential risk of increased
mortality, cardiovascular disease, hypertension, diabetes, back pain,
hyperlipidaemia, cholelithiasis and sleep apnoea. Obese children often
do not eat more than their peers. Genetic factors and reduced energy
output (long hours sitting in front of the TV and computer) are more
important causal factors. Obesity is usually the result of increases in
the number of fat cells (adipocytes) occurring during gestational months
and the first year of life. Any early obesity may persist. Hormonal and
endocrine causes of obesity are rare in clinical practise but often
considered to be the reason by parents. There are currently no drugs
­available that can be recommended for use in children.

Possible Diagnoses Infants

Children

Common Obese mother Infant of diabetic mother Post-term infants Oedema
(cardiac or renal) Drugs (e.g. steroids)

Simple obesity Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) Endocrine (e.g.
Cushing’s syndrome \[CS\]) Genetic syndromes (e.g. Turner’s syndrome)
Drugs (e.g. steroids, pizotifen, anticonvulsants, antidepressants)

Rare Insulinoma Beckwith–Wiedemann syndrome Cerebral gigantism (Sotos’
syndrome)

Cerebral gigantism (Sotos’ syndrome) Oedema (renal or cardiac)
Beckwith–Wiedemann syndrome Laurence–Moon–Biedl syndrome

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance

Positive family history More in females Associated tall stature
Diagnostic tests available Effective treatment available

Simple Obesity

PCOS

Endocrine (CS)

Genetic Syndrome

Drugs

Possible No Yes No No

No Yes No Yes Possible

No No No Yes Yes

Possible Yes No Yes No

No No Possible Possible Possible

Recommended Investigations *** *** *** *** \*\*\*

Urine: proteinuria in case of oedema caused by renal disease; free
cortisol confirms CS Thyroid function test (TFT): will confirm or
exclude hypothyroidism Urea and electrolytes (U&E) in blood: deranged in
CS Blood glucose for cases with non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus
Calcium and parathyroid hormone for cases with hypoparathyroidism

Systemic Physical Condition

------------------------------------------------------------------------

** ** \*\*

57

Serum cortisol levels will confirm CS Bone age: normal in simple
obesity, delayed Pelvic ultrasound scan: will confirm ovarian cysts in
PCOS; the adrenals for CS Computed tomography (CT) scan or magnetic
resonance imaging for suspected cases of CS

Top Tips • Obesity due to a syndrome (e.g. Prader-Willi) or endocrine
causes (e.g. hypothyroidism, CS) is rare. These children are
differentiated from those with simple obesity by being short, with
delayed bone age and delayed onset of secondary sexual characteristics.
While fat distribution in simple obesity is diffuse, truncal obesity
with thin legs is seen in CS. • Striae in simple obesity are pink,
occurring after rapid growth in adolescents, while these marks appear
earlier in CS and are violaceous. • A common reason for seeking medical
help for child’s obesity is parental concern about whether the ‘child’s
glands’ are normal. Obesity usually does not have ‘glands’ as an
underlying cause. • As BMI gives no indication of body fat distribution,
waist circumference (midway between the tenth rib and top of the iliac
crest) is a maker for central body fat accumulation and is more accurate
than BMI. • Much time is wasted in clinic by giving unwanted advice
about food. The child with ­obesity is aware of that and often upset by
frequently hearing that he or she is eating too much, and dietary
restriction is notoriously unsuccessful in treating the condition. • The
main cause of childhood-onset obesity is not overeating, but genetics
(usually ­confirmed by a detailed family history) and decreased energy
output. The latter can be estimated indirectly by the total hours spent
in front of the television and computer per day.

Red Flags • Beware of the finding of supernumerary digit in an obese
child: Laurence–Moon–Biedl syndrome (obesity, polydactyly, retinitis
pigmentosa and progressive nephropathy) is likely. • Do not miss another
uncommon but important physical sign in an obese child: when the hand is
clenched in a fist it may show short fourth and fifth knuckles – a sign
seen in ­pseudohypoparathyroidism and in girls with Turner’s syndrome. •
Record blood pressure in any child with obesity; it is elevated in those
with CS and Turner’s syndrome, and may also be elevated in simple
obesity, sooner or later. • Obesity may have child abuse (e.g. neglect)
as an underlying cause. If such a case is ­suspected, prompt referral to
appropriate service is essential.

FURTHER READING Umer A, Kelley GA, Cottrell LE et al. Childhood obesity
and adult cardiovascular disease risk factors: A ­systematic review with
meta-analysis. BMC Public Health 2017;17:683.

4

FACE

ACUTE FACIAL PAIN Clinical Overview Facial pain, like any other pain, is
an unpleasant sensory and emotional experience. The term is used to
describe, on looking at the face, facial pain before a pain condition is
diagnosed (pre-clinical pain). Facial trauma caused by an accident is
excluded, as there is a clear cause for the pain. Facial pain has a long
list of disorders including muscular-ligament inflammation (e.g.
temporomandibular joint, salivary gland disease, sinusitis), dental
(e.g. periodontal disease) and neurological causes (e.g. trigeminal
neuralgia, cluster headache, post-herpetic neuralgia). Assessing facial
pain and localising the source of the pain in children can be difficult,
particularly in infants and young children. Nevertheless, diagnosis is
usually possible by taking a good history and using pain assessment
techniques classified as self-reporting, behavioural observation (such
as facial expression, crying, forceful closure of the eyes) and
physiologic measures (such as tachycardia, pupil dilatation).

Possible Diagnoses Infants

Children

Common Otitis media Pharyngitis Facial osteomyelitis

Headaches (e.g. migraine, particularly cluster pain) Sinusitis Dental
abscess Tumour (benign or malignant)

Rare Facial osteomyelitis

Temporomandibular joint dysfunction Glaucoma Persistent idiopathic
facial pain Facial osteomyelitis (maxillary or mandibular) Herpes zoster
(pre-rash appearance) Salivary gland disease Post-herpetic neuralgia
(PHN) Post-traumatic trigeminal neuralgia Temporal arteritis Ramsay Hunt
syndrome Trigeminal neuralgia (tic douloureux)

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance Associated swelling Fever Tenderness
Localised pain Associated nausea/vomiting

58

Headache

Sinusitis

Dental Abscess

No No Possible No Yes

No Yes Yes Yes Possible

Possible Possible Yes Yes No

Trigeminal Neuralgia No No No Yes Possible

Facial Tumour Possible No Possible Possible No

Face

59

Recommended Investigations \*\* Full blood count (FBC): raised white
blood cell (WBC) count in inflammatory conditions \*\*  C-reactive
protein (CRP) and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR): raised in
infections, malignancy and temporal arteritis \*\* X-ray of the face may
show opacification of the sinus or mastoid area \*\* Dental X-ray if a
dental abscess is suspected \*** Computed tomography (CT)/magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) scan, which is more specific than an X-ray in
diagnosing sinusitis or facial tumour ** Sialography in suspected cases
of parotid duct stone ** Fine-needle biopsy for facial tumour **
Tonometry: if glaucoma is suspected

Top Tips • While the main site for neonatal facial osteomyelitis is the
area of maxillary bone and premaxillary suture, the mandible is the
usual location in older children. In both locations, children present
with swelling, fever (rare in neonates), pain and redness of skin and
oral mucosa. • Adolescents and adults with sinusitis typically present
with headaches, facial pain, tenderness and facial oedema, while
symptoms of sinusitis in young children are persistence of upper
respiratory tract infection, nasal discharge and cough that is typically
worse when lying down. • Trigeminal neuralgia is a sudden, severe,
stabbing, usually unilateral pain of one or more branches of the fifth
cranial nerve, which is often compressed. Tumour should be excluded. •
Idiopathic facial pain (previously called atypical facial pain) is a
deep and poorly localised pain that is present daily for more than 2
hours a day over more than 3 months. There is no sensory loss. It is a
diagnosis of exclusion. • PHN is defined as pain persisting for more
than 3 months after the onset of herpes zoster rash. Up to 50% of older
people are estimated to develop PHN following shingles. • Neuropathic
pain (e.g. trigeminal neuralgia) is notoriously difficult to treat with
opioids. Antidepressants (e.g. imipramine) and anticonvulsants (e.g.
carbamazepine) are often effective. • In managing pain, remember the
stepwise approach, published by the World Health Organisation, to
escalating therapy from weak analgesics (e.g. paracetamol or
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs) to strong ones (e.g. morphine).

Red Flags • Although pressing over the area of the sinuses is the best
direct method of examination, beware that the child might find any
pressure on the face to be painful. • Be aware that sinuses do not
become potential infection sites in early childhood because they are not
developed, so sinusitis should not be diagnosed in early childhood. •
Headaches may be the underlying disorder of facial pain. Remember that
the three important causes are migraine (usually throbbing), tension
headaches (usually ‘pressing’) and tumour with increased intracranial
pressure producing throbbing, pressing or sharp pain. • Neuropathic or
persistent idiopathic facial pain is a challenge for dentists because
the wrong dental diagnosis is often made, leading to the wrong
treatment.

FURTHER READING Zakrzewski JM. Facial pain: Neurological and
non-neurological. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 2002;72(Suppl 2):​
27–32.

60

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

FACIAL RASH Clinical Overview A child’s skin is more reactive than an
adult’s. For example, vesiculo-bullous eruptions are more common in
children, and many systemic diseases present with cutaneous
manifestations. In addition, the appearance of macules or patches does
not commonly remain static, and acute eruption can change rapidly to
become elevated (maculopapular) or blistering (maculovesicular). Facial
rash in this section is classified according to a simple practical
approach based on the morphological appearance of the rash: • • • • •

Macule (&lt;1 cm) and patch (&gt;1 cm): defined as alteration of skin
colour but no elevation is felt Papule (&lt;1 cm), nodule (&gt;1 cm) and
tumour (&gt;nodule) Vesicle (1 cm) and bulla (&gt;1 cm): defined as
fluid-filled, raised lesions Purpura, extravasation of blood, occurs
with petechiae (pin-point) or ecchymoses (patches) Eruptions can be a
mixture of lesions such as maculopapular, papulo-vesicular or vesiculo-​
bullous • Vascular and pigmented birthmarks are not included in this
section; see Chapter 14.

Possible Diagnoses Infants

Children

Common Papulo-vesicular (e.g. atopic dermatitis) Macules or patches
(e.g. viral infectious diseases) Patch (salmon patch) Papulo-pustular
(e.g. erythema toxicum) Papules (e.g. seborrhoeic dermatitis \[SD\])

Macules/patches (e.g. viral infections, allergy) Papules (e.g. insect
bites, scabies) Papulo-vesicular (e.g. atopic dermatitis)
Vesiculo-pustular (e.g. non-bullous impetigo) Purpuric (e.g.
meningococcaemia)

Rare Bullae (e.g. bullous impetigo) Vesiculo-bullous (e.g. herpes
infections)

Bullae (epidermolysis bullosa, bullous impetigo) Nodular (e.g.
angio-fibroma in tuberous sclerosis) Papulo-pustulo-nodular (e.g. acne)
Vesiculo-bullous (e.g. herpes infections) Papule-plagues (e.g. lichen
planus) Patch, periorbital, violaceous (dermatomyositis) Papulo-squamous
(e.g. psoriasis, pityriasis rosea) Vesicles, linear (poison ivy, contact
dermatitis)

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance Itchy Associated fever Rash elsewhere
Ill-looking Respond to local treatment

Macules

Papules

Papulo-Vesicular

Vesico-Pustular

Purpuric

Possible Yes Yes Possible No

Yes No No No Yes

Yes No No No Yes

Possible No No No Yes

No Yes Yes Yes No

Face

61

Recommended Investigations **   FBC: leukopenia in some viral diseases,
e.g. measles, leukocytosis (e.g. HHV-6) **   CRP: high in bacterial
diseases, e.g. meningococcal disease \*\*\* BC for suspected cases of
meningococcaemia **   Auto-antibodies, e.g. ANA, double-stranded DNA in
systemic lupus erythematosus **\* Muscle enzymes (e.g. creatine
phosphokinase) \*\*\* MRI and muscle biopsy for dermatomyositis

Top Tips • In contrast to atopic dermatitis (AD), SD is usually present
within the first month of life, disappears when the child is aged 1–2
years, and is usually non-pruritic. • Among those rashes causing intense
pruritis are urticaria, AD and lichen planus. • Pruritis from any cause
is always worse at night. The warmth of bedclothes causes vasodilatation
in the skin, which worsens the itching. Ask parents how well their child
sleeps at night. • AD should be diagnosed with strict criteria for both
major factors (e.g. family or personal history of atopy, typical facial
or extensor lesions) and minor (elevated IgE, xerosis, susceptibility
for infection). • Urticaria (mostly caused by drugs, food or viruses) is
often confused with erythema multiforme. The latter produces typical
iris or target lesions, and mucosal involvement is common. • Although
drugs can cause a variety of cutaneous morphologies, the most common
druginduced rashes are urticaria, erythema multiforme and maculopapular
eruptions. • Juvenile dermatomyositis (JDM) is now part of inflammatory
idiopathic myopathies. JDM is characterised by proximal muscle weakness,
facial heliotrope rash and Gottron’s papules.

Red Flags • Remember to examine the buccal mucosa in any child
presenting with a rash. Examples include reticulate, white plaques in
lichen planus and vesiculo-bullous lesions in erythema multiforme. • In
children with pruritic skin eruption, treating the pruritis is more
important than the rash. • Although purpura is the most common rash of
meningococcal disease, other rashes include maculopapular, pustular and
bullous lesions. • Be aware that rash due to sunburn may occur in cloudy
weather without sun exposure. • Children with AD are at risk of a
serious complication with herpes simplex virus – eczema herpeticum –
which can be fatal. Intravenous acyclovir is the mainstay of treatment.
• Be aware that in children with cold urticaria, pruritic painful rash
appears on exposure to cold on exposed parts of the body. Swimming in
cold water is dangerous and can be fatal.

FURTHER READING Van Dijkhuizen EHP, De lorio M, Wedderburn LR et al.
Clinical signs and symptoms in a joint model of four disease activity
parameters in juvenile dermatomyositis: A prospective, longitudinal,
multicenter cohort study. Arthritis Res Ther 2018;20:180.

62

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

FACIAL SWELLING Clinical Overview Facial swelling is a common clinical
paediatric problem. The term refers to an enlargement of any area of the
face, including the eyes, nose, mouth, forehead, cheeks and chin.
Swelling is usually caused by an abnormal buildup of fluid in the face –
oedema – which is the most common cause of facial swelling. Oedema is
either generalised – caused by systemic diseases such as nephrotic
syndrome (NS), glomerulonephritis, congestive cardiac failure (CCF),
acute and chronic renal failure (ARF and CRF) or hypoproteinaemia – or
localised – caused by allergy such as angioneurotic oedema or bee sting.
Genuine oedema needs to be differentiated from ‘puffy face’, which is
often found in association with obesity, hypothyroidism and Cushing’s
syndrome. Facial masses are the second most common causes of facial
swelling.

Possible Diagnoses Infants

Children

Common Oedema (acute illness, excess IV fluid) Electrolyte imbalance
(e.g. prematurity) ARF

Dental abscess Haemangioma Salivary gland diseases (mumps, duct stone
&lt; tumour) Allergy (angioneurotic oedema, bee sting) Generalised
oedema (e.g. NS)

CCF Lymphoedema Rare Haemangioma, teratoma Parotid swelling (e.g.
neonatal parotitis)

Infections (e.g. sinusitis, HIV, trichinosis) Midline dermoid cyst
Lymphoedema, lymphangioma Hereditary angioedema (HAE) Subcutaneous
emphysema Tuberculosis, sarcoidosis Renal failure Superior vena cava
obstruction Tumour (e.g. rhabdomyosarcoma, Ewing’s sarcoma) Metastatic
neuroblastoma

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance Acute onset Associated pain
Unilateral Associated itch Swelling elsewhere

Dental Abscess

Haemangioma

Salivary Gland Diseases

Allergy

Generalised

Possible Yes Yes No No

No No Yes No No

Possible Possible Yes No No

Yes No No Yes Yes

Yes No No No Yes

Recommended Investigations *** Urine for protein in NS or
glomerulonephritis, and for free cortisol for Cushing’s syndrome ***
Blood for serum urea and electrolytes, albumin and triglyceride in
suspected NS

63

Face

** *** *** ** *** ***

Blood for RAST (or skin prick test) for allergy; C1 esterase for
hereditary angioedema Blood for dexamethasone suppression test for
Cushing’s syndrome Chest X-ray, electrocardiogram and echocardiography
to diagnose the cause of CCF Ultrasound scan is useful for suspected
facial tumours such as a parotid tumour CT scan or MRI for sinusitis and
underlying tumours Sialography and/or sialendoscopy to demonstrate
salivary duct stone

Top Tips • A premature infant is at high risk of developing generalised
oedema, including facial oedema, because of low glomerular infiltration
rate and an inability to handle water and solute loads. • Dental abscess
is due to bacterial infection of the dental pulp or the gum (periodontal
abscess). • Sinusitis can be easily diagnosed clinically: children have
fever (50%–60%), mid-face pressure tenderness and/or pain, nasal
secretion and obstruction and hyposmia. • Angio-oedema (or angioneurotic
oedema) is similar to urticaria, except it affects the deeper layers of
subcutaneous and mucous tissues. Its intense pruritis and redness
differentiate it from generalised oedema caused, for example, by
hypoproteinaemia. • There are 700–1,000 salivary glands in the
oropharynx, in three major areas (parotid, submandibular, sublingual).
Adults produce c. 1.5 L of saliva daily, &gt;70% from the submandibular
gland. • Recurrent parotitis presents as acute swelling of the affected
gland due to either congenital causes (e.g. dilatation of the duct
causing saliva stasis) or a stone obstructing the saliva’s passage. •
Lymphoedema – non-pitting oedema of the face – is either congenital
(e.g. Milroy’s disease, Turner’s syndrome in girls, Noonan’s syndrome in
boys) or acquired following removal of lymph nodes for biopsy or
radiation therapy for cancer; rarely it is caused by filariasis
infection.

Red Flags • Remember that an acute dental abscess may be painless and
present as fever, chills or pyrexia of unknown origin (PUO). Dental
abscess needs to be excluded in any case of PUO. • Rapidly progressive
facial swelling may suggest a malignant tumour such as rhabdomyosarcoma,
while slowly progressive facial swelling is often caused by less serious
conditions such as fibrous dysplasia, haemangioma or neurofibroma. •
Facial swelling may be caused by superior vena cava obstruction, which
manifests as swollen face especially around the eyes, distended neck and
prominent chest veins. • Beware that HIV may initially present as
painful or painless parotid swelling. • Children with episodic
hereditary angioedema are at risk of potentially fatal laryngeal
swelling. It is essential that all family members, including infants,
are investigated. • If a child presents with swelling of the glabella
area (area between the eyebrows), then encephalocele, nasal glioma or
midline or nasal dermoid cyst should be excluded. Encephaloceles have an
intracranial connection; 25% of cases of dermoid cyst have intracranial
connection. • Intranasal encephalocele can be seen hanging in the nasal
cavity, and can be mistaken as a polyp. Its removal causes serious
complications such as CSF liquorrhoea and/or meningitis.

FURTHER READING Ivo H, Zenk J. Salivary gland diseases in children. GMS
Curr Top Otorhinolaryngol Head Neck Surg 2014;13:Doc06.

64

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

FACIAL WEAKNESS Clinical Overview Facial weakness may be congenital or
acquired, idiopathic or caused by infection, inflammation, trauma,
tumour or a vascular event. The most common cause of congenital facial
weakness is trauma during delivery. The most common cause of acquired
facial weakness is Bell’s palsy, which is an idiopathic, isolated lower
motor-neuron lesion of the seventh nerve characterised by sudden onset
weakness. As a rule, children with facial weakness have better prognosis
than adults. Facial weakness should be differentiated from facial
asymmetry, which may result from underdevelopment of the muscle
controlling the lip, excessive moulding of the cranium, or face
presentation during delivery, or in older children with hemihypertrophy.

Possible Diagnoses Infants

Children

Common Birth injury (e.g. forceps delivery) Congenital myasthenia
Congenital myopathies (e.g. nemaline) Möbius syndrome Agenesis of
depressor angularis oris muscle

Bell’s palsy Infection (e.g. Lyme disease, herpes zoster) Myopathies
(myotonic dystrophy) Myasthenia gravis

Rare Transient myasthenia gravis Coloboma, heart defect, atresia rate of
the choanae, retarded growth, genital hypoplasia and ear anomaly
(CHARGE) association Bell’s palsy

Goldenhar’s syndrome

Agenesis of the depressor angularis oris muscle CHARGE association

Chronic ataxic neuropathy with ophthalmoplegia, M-protein, agglutination
and disialosyl antibodies (CANOMAD) Guillain–Barré syndrome Ramsay Hunt
syndrome Neuro-sarcoidosis Poland’s syndrome Hypertension Möbius
syndrome

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance Congenital Facial weakness only
Unilateral Lower motor Sudden onset

Bell’s Palsy

Infection

Myopathy

No Yes Yes Yes Yes

No Possible Possible Yes Possible

Possible No No Yes No

Möbius Syndrome

Recommended Investigations \*\*\* Anti-acetylcholine and anti-nuclear
antibodies for myasthenia \*\*\* Edrophonium test (0.2 mg/kg IV) in
myasthenia

Yes No No No No

Myasthenia Possible No No Yes No

65

Face

------------------------------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

\*\* \*  

Electromyogram: more specifically diagnostic than a muscle biopsy in
myasthenia gravis Neuroimaging: for cases not recovering Nerve
conduction studies Muscle biopsy has limited value in myasthenia

Top Tips • Unilateral facial weakness due to forceps delivery has an
almost 100% recovery rate, while the recovery rate of older children
with the acquired form of Bell’s palsy is 80%–90%. • Bell’s palsy
affects the taste of two-thirds of the anterior tongue and salivary and
lacrimal glands. Early effects include difficulty in eating, difficulty
in speech and corneal dryness. Later symptoms include pain around the
ear, altered taste, involuntary facial spasm and impaired lacrimation. •
Möbius syndrome is congenital hypoplasia of the motor nuclei of III, IV
and V, in addition to VII. • Conditions often mistaken as facial
weakness include hemihypertrophy (congenital overgrowth often involving
the size or length of extremities, but it may involve the face) and
Goldenhar’s syndrome (oculo-auriculo-vertebral with hypoplastic malar
and maxilla on one side and sensory neural deafness) due to a defect of
the first two branchial arches. • CANOMAD syndrome is a rare
immune-mediated demyelinating polyneuropathy.

Red Flags • Facial palsy in neonates is not apparent until crying, when
the facial asymmetry becomes clear. • Gradual onset of facial weakness
over 2–3 weeks may suggest a neoplastic cause. • Patients with facial
weakness suffer from impaired verbal communication and social
interaction, leading to emotional stress and social isolation. Treatment
is urgent and essential. • In Lyme disease, caused by the spirochete
Borrelia burgdorferi, facial nerve palsy may be the initial or the only
manifestation of the disease. • Patients with facial palsy are not able
to close the eye on the affected side, leading to keratitis and corneal
ulceration. Protection of the cornea with eye drops is of paramount
importance. • Agenesis of depressor angularis oris muscle – also termed
asymmetric facial crying or congenital unilateral lower lip palsy
(CULLP) – is a congenital defect due to underdevelopment of the muscle
controlling the lip. It is often mistaken as facial palsy; the lesion is
permanent. • An uncommon cause of facial weakness is acoustic neuroma,
occurring either as a sporadic form or in association with
neurofibromatosis type 2. Children present with hearing loss (the most
common symptom, in 95%), vertigo and tinnitus.

FURTHER READING Ciorba A, Corazzi V, Con V et al. Facial nerve paralysis
in children. World J Clin Cases 2015;3(12):973–979.

5

NECK

HOARSENESS (DYSPHONIA) Clinical Overview Pathologies in the larynx in
children are caused by four main groups: acute infection, airway
stenosis, tumours and foreign body. The term dysphonia includes any
impairment of the voice or alteration in the sound of the voice.
Hoarseness subsequent to an acute upper airway obstruction (causing
croup) in association with a viral upper respiratory tract infection
(URTI) is by far the most common presentation in children. Croup is
characterised by abrupt onset at night, with barking cough, inspiratory
stridor and respiratory distress. Mild obstruction usually causes
transient symptoms (hoarseness and stridor). More severe degrees of
obstruction cause more persistent symptoms of stridor and hoarseness,
nasal flaring and subcostal and intercostal recession. Recovery within a
few days is usually the rule. On rare occasions such an obstruction is
caused by more serious underlying causes, such as Staphylococcal aureus
(causing bacterial tracheitis) and Haemophilus influenzae type b
(causing epiglottitis). The obstruction is more serious in infants and
young children than in older children because of the smaller airway and
the more likely obstruction. Persistent hoarseness usually suggests cord
paralysis or tumours. In this section, abnormal or unusual voices are
included.

Possible Diagnoses Infants

Children

Common Trauma to vocal cords Excessive crying Prolonged ventilation
(vocal nodule) Central nervous system disease (Chiari malformation)
Viral laryngotracheobronchitis Rare Benign tumour (haemangioma)
Cri-du-chat syndrome (5p-deletion)

66

Laryngotracheobronchitis (croup) Spasmodic croup Angioedema Overuse of
the voice (excessive crying) Vocal cord abnormality (e.g. haemangioma)

Corticosteroid inhalation therapy Bacterial tracheitis (staphylococcal
infection) Epiglottitis Gastro-oesophageal (GO) reflux Juvenile
recurring papillomatosis Infectious mononucleosis Aspiration of foreign
body Tumour (e.g. papilloma, rhabdomyosarcoma) Hypothyroidism Vocal cord
paralysis (postoperative) Wegener’s disease Rheumatoid arthritis
Systemic lupus erythematosus (Continued)

67

Neck (Continued) Infants

Children Measles croup Chemotherapy toxicity (e.g. vincristine,
cisplatin) Retropharyngeal or peritonsillar abscess Laryngeal abscess
Hypocalcaemic tetany Laryngeal sarcoidosis Amyloidosis

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance Fever Preceded by URTI Onset at night
Skin eruption Stridor

Viral Croup

Spasmodic Croup

Angioedema

Overuse of Voice

Vocal Cord Abnormality

Possible Yes Yes No Yes

No No Yes No Yes

No No No Yes Possible

No No No No Possible

No No No No Yes

Recommended Investigations Most cases of acute hoarseness and stridor do
not need any investigation. **  Thyroid function tests to exclude
hypothyroidism **  Serum calcium to confirm hypocalcaemia **  Blood
culture indicated for suspected cases of epiglottitis Direct
laryngoscopy to diagnose laryngeal haemangiomas and paralysis of the
vocal cord **\*  **  Chest X-ray may diagnose vascular ring or
aspiration Computed tomography scan or magnetic resonance imaging of the
head to diagnose **   Chiari malformation

Top Tips • Laryngeal injury may occur subsequent to birth trauma,
resulting in unilateral vocal cord paralysis producing hoarseness and
stridor. In addition, bilateral paralysis causes dyspnoea. • GO reflux
is an important cause of laryngospasm or vocal cord dysfunction.
Presentation is usually with cough, vomiting and feeding problems, in
addition to hoarseness. • Differentiating viral croup from spasmodic
croup is easy: the latter is not associated with fever, has no
antecedent URTI, and symptoms are more transient compared to viral
croup. • The prognosis of viral and spasmodic croup is excellent. About
1%–2% of children with laryngotracheobronchitis have severe symptoms
requiring intensive care and intubation. • Inhaled corticosteroids are
the most effective medication for asthma control. Adverse effects
include hoarseness, candidiasis, cough reflex and pharyngitis. Effect on
the vocal cords is due to ‘steroid myopathy’ causing deformity and
bowing of the vocal muscles. • Juvenile recurring papillomatosis usually
occurs between the ages of 2 and 4 years and is a major cause of
hoarseness. The infection is caused by peri-partum transmission of human
papillomavirus (HPV). Type HPV-11 may lead to obstruction of the
respiratory tract, requiring tracheostomy.

68

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

Red Flags • Bilateral vocal cord paralysis may lead to recurrent
pneumonia caused by recurrent aspiration. • In contrast to lower
respiratory tract obstruction, children with croup do not usually have
hypoxia (normal oxygen saturation); if hypoxia is detected, prompt
treatment is needed. • Symptoms of laryngotracheobronchitis do not
usually continue for more than a few days. Persistent hoarseness
requires laryngoscopy to detect the cause. • A child with ‘croup’ who
rapidly becomes unwell with sternal retraction and decreased level of
consciousness, with or without fever, either has extension of the croup
into the respiratory tract pending respiratory failure (bacterial
tracheitis) or has bacterial epiglottitis. • A young child (6 months–2
years) with sudden choking and coughing, with or without stridor or
hoarseness, should be suspected of foreign-body aspiration. • As part of
anaphylaxis and severe allergic reaction, sudden onset of angioedema of
the subglottic areas may occur. Adrenaline injection is life-saving. •
Papilloma is the most common tumour of the larynx. Although usually
benign and often regressing at the time of puberty, it can extend into
the lower airways and lungs, causing a serious disease.

FURTHER READING McAllister A, Sjölander P. Children’s voice and voice
disorders. Semin Speech Lang 2013;34:71–79. Reiter R, Hoffmann TK,
Pickhard A et al. The hypothesis of apraxia of speech in children with
autism spectrum disorder. J Autism Dev Disord 2011;41(4):405–426.

69

Neck

NECK LUMPS (LYMPHADENOPATHY) Clinical Overview Lumps in the neck are
common and are usually benign in children. Of the many lumps found in
the neck, cervical lymphadenopathy is the most common physical finding.
It usually results from viral infection leaving behind small (&lt;1 cm),
non-tender mobile lymph nodes, which are considered normal in children.
Lymph nodes are considered enlarged when their diameter exceeds 1 cm for
cervical and axillary lymph nodes and 1.5 cm for inguinal lymph nodes.
Cervical lymph nodes drain lymph from the head and neck areas; submental
and submandibular lymph nodes drain from the buccal mucosa, cheek and
nose; supraclavicular lymph nodes drain from right-sided thorax and
left-sided abdomen; axillary drain from the ipsilateral arm, breast and
neck; and inguinal lymph nodes drain from the ipsilateral leg and
buttocks. About one-third of neonates have palpable lymph nodes, usually
smaller than 1 cm in diameter. They are commonly present in the inguinal
area due to infection of the nappy area. Generalised lymphadenopathy
indicates involvement of enlarged lymph nodes in more than two node
regions. Pathological lymphadenopathy is defined by abnormally large
lymph nodes with tenderness, matted together or fixed to the skin or
underlying structures, or localised in the supraclavicular area.

Possible Diagnoses Infants

Children

Common Lymphadenopathy Goiter Sternomastoid tumour Dermoid cyst
Thyroglossal cyst Rare Cystic hygroma Branchial cyst

Reactive lymphadenitis due to local infection Systemic infection (e.g.
Kawasaki disease, mononucleosis) Goiter Malignancy (e.g. lymphoma,
rhabdomyosarcoma) Thyroglossal cyst Juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA)
Tuberculosis (TB) lymphadenitis Cat-scratch fever Systemic lupus
erythematosus (SLE) Kaposi’s sarcoma, teratoma Lipoma, dermoid cyst
Drugs (INH, phenytoin)

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance Tender Generalised Moves with
swallowing Midline Fixed to skin

Reactive Lymphadenitis

Systemic Disease

Goiter

Lymphoma

Thyroglossal Cyst

Possible Possible No No No

Possible Yes No No No

No No No Yes No

No Possible No No Yes

No No Yes Yes No

Recommended Investigations \*\*\* Chest X-ray: first-line investigation
and helpful in case of TB or lymphoma **  Ultrasound of the neck is
useful for any lump Full blood count (FBC): leukocytosis favours
bacterial infection; atypical lymphocytes **\*  for mononucleosis

70

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

**  Liver function tests: abnormal in Epstein–Barr virus (EBV) or
cytomegalovirus (CMV) **  EBV serological panel test or IgG for EBV
\*\*\* Tuberculin skin test for suspected TB adenitis **  Serum antibody
studies for EBV, CMV, HIV, or bartonella (cat-scratch fever) **\* Needle
aspiration for a Gram stain and culture in suspected malignancy

Top Tips • Lymph nodes act as a filter between lymphatic and
haematological circulations. They contain immunological cells including
macrophages, B cells and T cells. • The most common neck lump is
reactive lymphadenopathy, usually caused by a viral infection. The
condition is benign, but the lymph nodes may remain as harmless palpable
lumps for months or years. Parents usually fear the possibility of
cancer; it is important to reassure them. • Generalised lymphadenopathy
suggests either systemic infection (e.g. AIDS, mononucleosis,
toxoplasmosis), autoimmune disease (e.g. JIA) or malignancy (e.g.
leukaemia). • A thyroglossal cyst, which develops from the remnant
thyroglossal duct, is painless but becomes enlarged and tender if
infected. The pathognomonic sign is its vertical movement on swallowing
and tongue protrusion. These cysts are the second most common neck
masses after lymph nodes. • The usual branchial cyst looks like an
insignificant papule on the side of the neck, off centre (in contrast to
thyroglossal cyst). Tracing out its tract in surgical removal may be
quite difficult. • The most common acquired goiter in children is
Hashimoto’s thyroiditis, presenting with normal thyroid function or
hypothyroidism. • JIA often presents with generalised lymphadenopathy,
seen mostly in systemic form (Still’s disease) in association with
fever, rash and hepatosplenomegaly.

Red Flags • Be aware that some lymph nodes are present in virtually any
child; the total absence of palpable lymph nodes suggests the
possibility of immune deficiency such as agammaglobulinaemia. • Cervical
lymphadenopathy is often among the initial presentations in HIV-infected
patients. Look for oral candida or gingivitis to support the diagnosis.
• Painless generalised lymphadenopathy may precede the other symptoms of
SLE by months or years. Screening for SLE may clinch the diagnosis. • Be
very cautious in undertaking needle aspiration for TB lymphadenitis as
there is a real risk of fistula. • Urgent referral is indicated if the
lymph nodes are matted or fixed, &gt;2 cm in diameter, non-tender, less
mobile or associated with persistent or unexplained fever, night sweat,
or anorexia or weight loss. Fine-needle aspiration has a high
specificity and is less invasive, cheaper and quicker. • Kawasaki
disease may present with fever and cervical lymphadenopathy only.
Bacterial lymphadenitis is often diagnosed, thus delaying diagnosis, and
treatment can lead to serious cardiac complications. • A thyroglossal
cyst should never be excised unless the possibility of thyroid tissue is
excluded. • Thyroid nodules are uncommon in children compared to adults,
but are often malignant in up to 25%.

FURTHER READING Lang S, Kansy B. Cervical lymph node diseases in
children. GMC Curr Top Otorhinolaryngol Head Neck Surg 2014;13:Doc08.

71

Neck

SORE THROAT AND MOUTH Clinical Overview Sore throat and sore mouth are
common in children. According to the World Health Organisation,
approximately 600 million new cases of acute tonsillo-pharyngitis caused
by group A streptococci (GAS) occur annually in children worldwide. Of
these, 15.6 million develop rheumatic heart disease, with 233,000 deaths
each year, mostly in developing countries. The most common cause in
young children is a viral URTI, including pharyngitis. An infection rate
of 6–8 infections a year is considered a normal range. Higher incidence
is found in infants and children who attend nursery and whose siblings
attend nursery or school. Acute pharyngitis refers to the pharynx as the
principal site of the inflammatory process. Viruses (e.g. adenoviruses,
EBV) and bacteria (most commonly GAS) have overlapping symptoms and
signs, and clinically they are often indistinguishable from each other.
This infection is uncommon in children younger than 1 year of age, peaks
at the age of 4–7 years and continues throughout later childhood.

Possible Diagnoses Infants

Children

Common Viral URTI With exanthem (measles, varicella) Herpetic
gingivostomatitis Croup Bacterial tonsillo-pharyngitis Rare
Oropharyngeal thrush Kawasaki disease Herpangina Diphtheria

Viral tonsillo-pharyngitis (with URTI) Bacterial tonsillitis Glandular
fever (GF) Herpetic gingivostomatitis With exanthem (e.g. measles,
varicella)

Kawasaki disease Scarlet fever Herpangina Immunodeficiency (e.g. HIV
infection) Leukopenia/neutropenia Epiglottitis Retropharyngeal abscess
Peritonsillar abscess Psychogenic Diphtheria Oropharyngeal thrush
Aphthous ulceration

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance

Gingival lesions Lymphadenopathy Response to antibiotics Associated URTI
Exudate on tonsils

Viral Tonsillo-Pharyngitis

Bacterial Tonsillo-Pharyngitis

Glandular Fever

Herpetic Stomatitis

With Exanthem

No Possible No

No Yes Yes

No Yes No

Yes Possible No

Possible Possible No

Yes Yes

No Yes

No Yes

No No

Yes No

72

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

Recommended Investigations \*\*\* FBC may show leukocytosis in bacterial
infection or lymphocytosis in GF \*\* Throat swab to culture GAS may be
useful \*\*  An antistreptolysin (ASO)-titre with fourfold increase in
1–2 weeks is diagnostic for streptococcal infection \*\*\* EBV
serological panel is useful to diagnose glandular fever; IgM for EBV is
positive in almost 100%

Top Tips • The main reasons for antibiotic therapy of bacterial
pharyngitis are not only to treat the symptoms, but also to prevent
complications (e.g. peritonsillar abscess, rheumatic fever and
glomerulonephritis). • The vast majority of cases of
tonsillo-pharyngitis are caused by viral infections in association with
an URTI; antibiotics therefore are not indicated for the majority of
cases. • Streptococci colonisation occurs in 10%–20% of normal
school-aged children, as shown by positive swab culture. They are not at
risk of developing rheumatic fever or glomerulonephritis. Antibiotics
are not helpful for clearing GAS. • In contrast to herpetic stomatitis
caused by herpes virus, which has lesions on the gingiva, in herpangina
(caused by coxsackievirus), there are discrete punctate vesicles
surrounded by erythematous rings on the soft palate, anterior pillars
and uvula. • Tonsillectomy or partial tonsillectomy (tonsillotomy) is
recommended for recurrent tonsillitis (equal to or more than the
episodes in the preceding year), peritonsillar abscess, and PFAPA
(periodic fever, aphthous stomatitis, pharyngitis and cervical
adenitis).

Red Flags • Many systemic diseases (e.g. Crohn’s disease,
agranulocytosis) manifest in the oral cavity as mucosal changes, which
present clinically as sore throat. Look for an underlying disease. • In
suspected epiglottitis (toxic-looking, high fever, muffled voice), the
throat should not be inspected. The child is to be transported to
accident and emergency in consultation with ear, nose and throat (ENT)
and anaesthesia. • In mononucleosis, antibiotics (amoxicillin) should
not be administered, to prevent skin eruption. Serious complications are
rare but should be considered, including airway obstruction secondary to
oropharyngeal inflammation, spontaneous splenic rupture and Hodgkin’s
lymphoma. • Children with obstructive sleep apnoea (OSA), caused by
adenotonsillar hypertrophy, are at risk of growth retardation and
cardiovascular and neuro-behavioural complications. Referral to ENT with
consideration of tonsillectomy is strongly indicated. • If there is
unexplained oropharyngeal candida infection, consider immunosuppression
(HIV). • A torn frenum detected at oral examination is widely regarded
as pathognomonic of child abuse. Parents/carers usually offer an
inadequate explanation for the injury. • Symptoms of
laryngotracheobronchitis do not usually continue for more than a few
days. Persistent hoarseness requires laryngoscopy to detect the cause.

Neck

73

• A child with ‘croup’ who rapidly becomes unwell with high fever either
has developed extension of the infection into the respiratory tract
(bacterial tracheitis) as a complication of the viral croup or has
bacterial epiglottitis. • A young child (6 months–2 years) with sudden
choking, coughing, with or without stridor or hoarseness, should be
suspected of having foreign-body aspiration. • As part of anaphylaxis
and a severe allergic reaction, sudden onset of angioedema of the
subglottic areas may occur. Epinephrine injection is life-saving. •
Papilloma is the most common tumour of the larynx. Although usually
benign and often regressing at the time of puberty, it can extend into
the lower airways and lungs, causing serious disease.

FURTHER READING Carapetis JR, Steer AC, Mulholland EK et al. The global
burden of group A streptococcal diseases. Lancet Infect Dis
2005;5(11):685–694.

74

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

STIFF NECK Clinical Overview This symptom is extremely important because
of the possibility of meningitis and other serious bacterial infections
such as pneumonia. It is a common complaint in paediatrics for both
emergency and primary care services. The term refers to abnormal
position of the neck or restricted range of movement, usually associated
with pain during passive and active movement. Of the many causes of
stiff neck, the two main and important causes are meningitis and
torticollis (wry neck), which is characterised by tilting and rotation
of the head to one side, with restricted rotation towards the opposite
side. In infants, it is usually caused by a shortening sternomastoid
muscle after the formation of swelling (called sternomastoid tumour);
another possible cause is cervical spine abnormality. Meningism is the
other important cause and always requires emergency evaluation. It is
characterised by the presence of signs of neck stiffness in flexion
position. The most common cause of meningism is meningeal irritation
(meningitis or cerebral haemorrhage). In contrast to torticollis, a
child with meningism is usually ill-looking with fever. Cerebrospinal
fluid examination is usually required to exclude meningitis.

Possible Diagnoses Infants

Children

Common Muscular torticollis (sternomastoid tumour, cerebral palsy)
Sandifer syndrome (GO reflux) Congenital abnormalities of cervical spine
Klippel–Feil syndrome Meningitis Rare Muscular cervical injury Pterygium
colli

Meningitis, meningococcal disease Pneumonia (e.g. upper lobe pneumonia)
Cervical lymphadenitis Acute torticollis (cervical muscle trauma) Neck
injury (whiplash injury) Infectious mononucleosis

Visual defects (nystagmus, superior oblique paresis) Dystonia Hysteria
Vertebral anomalies (e.g. Klippel–Feil malformation) Rheumatoid
arthritis Lyme disease (LD) Polymyalgia rheumatica Chiari malformation
Posterior fossa brain tumour Intracranial haemorrhage Retropharyngeal
abscess Spasmus nutans

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance Toxic appearance High fever Positive
meningeal signs Vomiting/headaches History of trauma

Meningitis

Pneumonia

Cervical Lymphadenitis

Acute Torticollis

Cervical Injury

Yes Yes Yes Yes No

Yes Yes No Possible No

No Possible No No No

No No No Possible Possible

Possible No No No Yes

Neck

75

Recommended Investigations **   FBC: leukocytosis suggests bacterial
infection in meningitis and pneumonia **\* Lumbar puncture to exclude
meningitis; for cases with aseptic meningitis, enterovirus polymerase
chain reaction should be tested for **   In the presence of pulmonary
symptoms, a chest X-ray is required to diagnose pneumonia **   Cervical
X-ray to diagnose spinal abnormalities such as fusion of the vertebrae
\*\*   Renal ultrasound scan to diagnose renal malformation (e.g.
Klippel–Feil syndrome)

Top Tips • Torticollis from sternomastoid tumor is initially minimal. At
10–20 days, a mass is frequently felt in the muscle that gradually
disappears; the fibrous tissue contracts, causing limited head motion. •
Mild neck stiffness following sleep may result from sleeping in an
awkward position. Gentle active rotation and flexion are usually
achievable. • Children with torticollis and dystonic drug reaction look
remarkably well despite the stiff neck, in contrast to those with
meningitis or pneumonia. • A child with Klippel–Feil malformation (short
neck, fusion of the cervical vertebrae) has a high rate of renal
malformations (40%). • Any child with meningism should be considered as
a case of meningitis until it is proved otherwise. • Most cases of
congenital torticollis are due to sternomastoid tumour, which is usually
palpable on the sternomastoid muscle. The torticollis responds to
physiotherapy. Those infants with no history of birth trauma and no
palpable mass should have anterio-posterior and lateral spine X-rays to
exclude structural abnormalities before starting physiotherapy. • In any
with stiff neck, it is important to assess the immunization status of
the child.

Red Flags • In infants, early presentations of meningitis can be subtle
and non-specific, often with irritability without fever. Bulging
fontanelle or signs of meningeal irritation are late signs of
meningitis. • In older children, the classical signs of meningitis
(fever, headache, vomiting, neck stiffness) may not occur; rather they
may present with virus-like illness and a mixture of leg pain,
drowsiness, confusion, neck pain, seizure and behavioural changes.
Within a few hours it can rapidly progress to septic shock, hypotension,
disseminated intravascular coagulation and death. Vigilance and a high
degree of suspicion are required. • Skin of a child with meningism
should be carefully searched for any rash or petechiae of meningococcal
disease. • Even if pneumonia is diagnosed, a child with meningism
requires LP to exclude meningitis. • Drug history is essential to
confirm a rare case of dystonic drug reaction (oculogyric crisis). •
Although acquired torticollis is mostly due to minor cervical muscle
trauma or an URTI, careful evaluation is essential to exclude serious
conditions such as a brain tumour or vertebral infection.

FURTHER READING Dorsett M, Liang SY. Diagnosis and treatment of central
nervous system infections in the emergency department. Emerg Med Clin
North Am 2016;34(4):917–942.

76

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

STRIDOR Clinical Overview There are four main groups of pathologies in
the larynx in children: acute infection, airway stenosis, tumours and
foreign body. Stridor is a harsh inspiratory sound caused by
extrathoracic airway obstruction. Its sudden onset is a terrifying
experience for the child and the parents. Inspiratory stridor is the
leading symptom for all laryngo-tracheal stenosis. It can occur in both
phases of respiration when the obstruction is severe. Most cases of
acute stridor are due to laryngotracheobronchitis (croup) caused mainly
by parainfluenza viruses type B. Other less common causes include
respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), adenoviruses, influenza A and B
viruses and measles virus. The infection is usually benign and produces
inflammation affecting the larynx, trachea, bronchi and sometimes
pulmonary parenchyma. The onset is usually characterised by an URTI,
followed by barking cough, hoarseness and a varying degree of
respiratory distress. Persistent stridor commencing in the first few
weeks of life is mostly caused by laryngomalacia as a result of collapse
of the supraglottic structure during inspiration. A child with
laryngomalacia has a normal cry (no hoarse voice) and a normal cough.

Possible Diagnoses Infants

Children

Common Laryngomalacia Post-ventilation Haemangioma Croup

Rare Vascular ring Hypoglycaemia (rickets) Laryngeal web Glottic
stenosis Diphtheritic croup Chiari malformation

Laryngotracheobronchitis (croup) Laryngomalacia Angioneurotic oedema
Spasmodic croup Bacterial tracheitis

Tonsillar lymphoma Hypoglycaemia (rickets) Measles croup Foreign body
Epiglottitis

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance Short history Fever With URTI Onset
at night Hoarseness

Croup

Spasmodic Croup

Bacterial Tracheitis

Laryngomalacia

Angioedema

Yes Possible Yes Yes Yes

Yes No No Yes Yes

Yes Yes Possible No No

No No No No No

Yes No No No Possible

Recommended Investigations Most acute cases of croup do not require any
investigation. There is overlap with the investigation in children with
hoarseness or stridor (see previous section on hoarseness
\[dysphonia\]).

Neck

77

Top Tips • History and respiratory sounds do not define the location and
the nature of the stenosis. Endoscopy is required to detect the exact
location, degree of stenosis, and its relation to other tissues. • The
most important aspect of acute stridor is to differentiate between a
life-threatening illness such as epiglottitis or foreign body and a
relatively harmless croup caused by a viral infection. • Nocturnal onset
of acute stridor with barking cough and hoarse voice is almost certainly
croup, whether viral or spasmodic. • Laryngomalacia is the most common
cause of persistent stridor during infancy. It is caused by a soft
tissue laxity above the vocal cords, which collapses during inspiration.
Parents can be reassured that recovery will occur when the child is aged
12–18 months, often even earlier. • Once the diagnosis of laryngomalacia
is made, direct examination of the larynx is not indicated. • Angioedema
is either allergic (often with urticaria), idiopathic, or hereditary,
which is present with recurrent episodes of swelling caused by mutation
of the gene encoding C1 esterase inhibitors. It is non-pitting,
non-dependent and transient, which is either histamine-mediated or
bradykinin-mediated, which is not mediated by IgE and not associated
with urticaria; adrenaline is ineffective.

Red Flags • A neonate with respiratory distress and severe stridor may
have a laryngeal web between the vocal cords. Immediate laryngoscopy is
required to prevent asphyxia. Laser treatment is successful. • A
toxic-looking child with high fever and swallowing difficulty has
epiglottitis. Admit to intensive care unit (ICU), and consult an ENT
surgeon and an anaesthetist. Do not examine the throat as this could
cause laryngeal spasm and respiratory obstruction. • Some children with
croup (1%–2%) may present with increasing respiratory distress and
worsening tachycardia. They will need intensive care and intubation. •
It is unusual for the common croup to have hypoxia (pulse oximeter below
92%). If present, this would be an ominous sign requiring urgent
attention. • Angioedema is often life-threatening, depending on
underlying cause and location. Prompt administration of adrenaline is
life-saving, even if it turned out to be bradykinin-mediated. •
Laryngomalacia should be investigated if associated with respiratory
distress, dyspnoea, cyanosis, failure to thrive or obstructive sleep
disorders. • In the absence of a viral respiratory tract infection, an
acute stridor in an infant or toddler may suggest foreign-body
aspiration. This is more likely if the history suggests sudden choking
and coughing.

FURTHER READING Sittel C. Pathologies of the larynx and trachea in
children. GMS Curr Top Otorhinolaryngol Head Neck Surg 2014;13:Doc09.

78

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

SWALLOWING DIFFICULTY (DYSPHAGIA) Clinical Overview Swallowing is a
complex mechanism involving some 50 muscle pairs (agonists and
antagonists) to bring swallowed material to the stomach. Swallowing is
observed as early as 20 weeks of gestation with amniotic fluid
swallowing. Sucking and swallowing and their coordination are
established at 33–34 weeks of gestation. Dysphagia is defined as a
difficulty in swallowing due to impaired transfer of fluids or food from
the oral cavity to the oesophagus (pre-oesophageal) and from the
oesophagus to the stomach (oesophageal dysphagia). Causes of
pre-oesophageal dysphagia are mainly neuromuscular, such as bulbar palsy
and myasthenia gravis. Dysphagia involves liquids and solids, liquids
being more difficult to swallow than solids. Causes of oesophageal
dysphagia are in the lumen (stricture, web, tumour, foreign body or
ring), in the wall (oesophagitis), or extramural (mediastinal mass). In
infants, dysphagia may manifest as low interest in food, body stiffness
or vomiting during feeding, unusually lengthy feeding or coughing or
gagging during feeding.

Possible Diagnoses Infants

Children

Common Extreme prematurity Asphyxia Respiratory distress syndrome Cleft
lip and palate Neuromuscular

Oropharyngeal (e.g. tonsillitis, tonsillar abscess, epiglottitis)
Neuromuscular (e.g. bulbar palsy in spasticity) Globus hystericus
Oesophagitis Collagen vascular diseases (e.g. dermatomyositis)

Rare Tracheo-oesophageal fistula Vascular ring Oesophageal stricture
Nasal obstruction (choanal stenosis/atresia) Prader-Willi syndrome

Mediastinal mass Neuromuscular (e.g. myasthenia gravis) Oesophagitis (GO
reflux, corrosive ingestion) Oesophageal tumour, web Oesophageal
stricture Oesophageal foreign body Potocki-Lupski syndrome (chromosomal
duplication) Ectopic thyroid Eosinophilic oesophagitis Achalasia
Vascular ring Lower oesophageal ring (Schatzki’s ring) Plummer-Vinson
syndrome (sideropenic dysphagia) Oesophageal diverticulum (pharyngeal or
oesophageal) Drugs (potassium chloride, quinidine)

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance Acute onset Fever More solids Neuro
signs Symptom mild

Oropharyngeal

Spasticity

Globus Hystericus

Oesophagitis

Collagen Disease

Yes Yes Yes No Yes

No No No Yes No

Possible No Yes No Yes

Possible No Yes No Possible

No Possible Yes Possible Possible

Neck

Recommended Investigations \*\*  Serum muscle enzymes (creatine
phosphokinase): elevated in some neuromuscular diseases, e.g.
dermatomyositis \*\* Chest X-ray for possible vascular ring or
aspiration pneumonia \*\*\* Barium meal for any oesophageal cause of
dysphagia, including external compression \*\*\* Oesophagoscopy to
identify structural abnormalities or to obtain biopsy \*\*\* pH study to
detect GO reflux \*\* Video-fluoroscopy may detect oesophageal web and
motor disorders such as achalasia

Top Tips • The incidence of feeding/swallowing disorders is increasing
due to increased survival of premature babies (up to 80% experience oral
feeding difficulty) and improved life expectancy of children with
disability. • A young patient who complains of having a lump in the
throat or neck that is unrelated to swallowing is almost certainly
experiencing globus hystericus. This usually occurs in association with
anxiety, stress or grief. • Untreated severe iron-deficiency anaemia can
cause a thin mucosal membrane that grows across the lumen of the
oesophagus. • Achalasia is a neurogenic oesophageal disorder of unknown
aetiology which is characterised by the absence of peristalsis during
swallowing. This can be demonstrated by a barium meal. • Unless the
cause of the swallowing difficulty is easily established and acute (e.g.
tonsillitis), management is the responsibility of an expert team
including a speech-language therapist.

Red Flags • It is important to treat GO reflux before oesophagitis and
stricture develop. • Infants with swallowing difficulty who are fed by
mouth are at a high risk of aspiration which leads to recurrent
aspiration pneumonia. • Children with neuromuscular disorders (e.g.
cerebral palsy) are at risk of aspirationinduced lung injury, failure to
thrive and social isolation. An early referral to a neurologist and a
surgeon for consideration of gastrostomy is indicated. • Be aware that
in children presenting an unexplained respiratory problem, such as
persistent cough or aspiration pneumonia, oropharyngeal dysphagia should
be considered.

FURTHER READING Lau C. Development of suck and swallow mechanisms in
infants. Ann Nutr Metab 2015;66(Suppl 5):7–14.

79

6

NOSE

NASAL DISCHARGE/BLOCKED NOSE Clinical Overview Nasal discharge and
blockage are extremely common in children. By far the most common causes
are viral infectious rhinitis, allergic rhinitis (more common in older
children and adults; Figure 6.1) and adenoid hypertrophy. Breathing
difficulty in neonates and young infants may be caused by nasal
obstruction as a result of partial or complete choanal atresia. Although
the vast majority of causes are benign and self-limiting, serious
conditions include nasopharyngeal tumours, encephalocele and foreign
body. In these conditions, discharge is usually purulent and foul
smelling, with or without blood. Obstruction in the nasal passage
normally causes mouth breathing. Exclusively oral breathing is rare or
non-existent. It is rather a mixed nasal and mouth breathing. Prolonged
mouth breathing may lead to disorder of speech, dental malocclusion and
facial deformity (adenoid facies). Nasal discharge/ blockage impacts
negatively on a child’s quality of life by interfering with sleep,
daytime activities and school performance. Nasal discharge/blockage may
also exert effects on the sinuses, throat and voice that manifest as
impaired hearing, worsening asthma and problematic snoring.

FIGURE 6.1

Nasal discharge and red eyes in allergic rhinitis.

Possible Diagnoses Infants

Children

Common Baby snuffles Viral infectious rhinitis Adenoid hypertrophy
Congenital narrowing of nasal passages Choanal atresia/stenosis

Viral infectious rhinitis Allergic rhinitis (AR) Adenoid hypertrophy
Vasomotor rhinitis (VR) Nasal polyposis (Continued)

80

81

Nose Infants

Children

Rare Allergic rhinitis Nasal septum deviation (birth trauma) Congenital
syphilis Hypothyroidism Encephalocele Immotile cilia syndrome Coloboma,
heart defect, atresia rate of the choanae, retarded growth, genital
hypoplasia and ear anomaly (CHARGE) syndrome

Foreign body (occurring commonly in toddlers) Nasopharyngeal tumour
(e.g. angio-fibroma) Deviated nasal septum Unilateral choanal atresia or
stenosis Hypothyroidism Drugs causing rhinitis, cocaine abuse Immotile
cilia syndrome

Immunodeficiency Trauma causing cerebrospinal fluid rhinorrhoea
Encephalocele

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance

Infants affected Prolonged symptoms Itching/sneezing Diagnosis by nasal
endoscopy Positive allergy tests

Upper Respiratory Tract Infection

AR

Adenoid Hypertrophy

VR

Nasal Polyps

Yes No Possible No No

Possible Yes Yes Possible Yes

Yes Yes No No No

No No Possible No No

No Yes No Yes Possible

Recommended Investigations *   Full blood count (FBC): the presence of
eosinophilia may suggest allergic rhinitis *\*\* Total IgE in blood,
skin prick testing, or blood antibodies for possible allergens *   Sinus
X-ray may identify sinus opacity suggestive of sinusitis or a mass *\*\*
Nasal endoscopy for polyps or tumours \*\*\* Computed tomography (CT)
or magnetic resonance imaging is more sensitive than plain X-ray to
diagnose sinusitis or a tumour

Top Tips • Blocked nose in babies (‘snuffles’) is common due to presence
of mucus in a narrowed nasal passage. It is loud during feeding and
sleep and disappears when the baby reaches 4–5 months; reassurance is
the best medicine. • Neonates are obligatory nasal breathers; therefore,
those with bilateral choanal atresia present with severe respiratory
distress and cyanosis that improves when the child cries. Unilateral
choanal atresia or stenosis may be asymptomatic for many months and
presents later as persistent unilateral nasal discharge or unilateral
severe nasal obstruction. • Atresia or stenosis is diagnosed by
inability to pass a nasal catheter 3–4 cm into the nasopharynx. •
Symptoms of VR resemble those of AR but an allergic cause and
eosinophils in nasal secretions are absent; itching and sneezing are
minimal. Acute nasal obstruction with profuse watery discharge is
suggestive of VR.

82

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

• It is easy to diagnose polyps. In contrast to the highly vascularised
pink turbinate tissue, polyps are a grey, shiny, grape-looking mass
present between the nasal turbinates and the septum.

Red Flags • Choanal atresia is associated with other congenital
anomalies in about 50% (e.g. CHARGE syndrome). • An important cause of
‘baby snuffles’ is congenital syphilis. Anaemia and splenomegaly are
other findings. • While a foul-smelling or blood-tinged unilateral
discharge in a toddler suggests foreign-body aspiration, a persistent
bloody discharge always suggests a tumour, including malignancy. •
Although intranasal steroids are the most effective medication available
for the treatment of AR, their prolonged use may cause growth
suppression and atrophic changes in the nasal mucosa. • The presence of
nasal polyps should lead clinicians to exclude cystic fibrosis (CF),
even in the absence of pulmonary or intestinal symptoms. Some 20%–25% of
patients with CF have polyps. • Polyps are more commonly bilateral; if
unilateral, benign and malignant tumours should be distinguished by
nasal endoscopy, CT scan and/or biopsy. • Be wary of ‘obstructive sleep
apnoea’ with chronic airway obstruction, including nasal obstruction,
which can lead to chronic hypoxia, growth failure, pulmonary
hypertension, right-sided heart failure and even death. Predisposing
factors include adenotonsillar hypertrophy and trisomy 21. • Some
asthmatic children react with severe dyspnoea and nasal symptoms within
2 hours of aspirin ingestion. An ‘aspirin triad’ consists of asthma,
polyps and aspirin sensitivity. • Overuse of over-the-counter
medications (e.g. nasal spray or decongestants) may lead to rhinitis
medicamentosa. Taking a history should include what nasal medications
have been used.

FURTHER READING Basheer B, Hegde KS, Bahat SS et al. Influence of mouth
breathing on the dentofacial growth in children: A cephalometric study.
J Int Oral Health 2014;6(6):50–55. Meltzer EO, Caballero F, Krouse JH et
al. Treatment of congestion in upper respiratory diseases. Int J Gen
Medicine 2010;3:69–91.

83

Nose

NOSEBLEED (EPISTAXIS) Clinical Overview Epistaxis in children is a
common condition, which is usually benign and self-limiting but often
causes significant parental anxiety. About 30% of children aged under 5
years and over 50% of those aged 6–10 years experience at least one
episode of epistaxis. Incidence is rare before 2 years of age and
uncommon after puberty. The nasal mucosa of the nasal septum has a rich
vascular supply arising from convergence of both internal and external
carotid arteries (Kiesselbach’s plexus). Epistaxis is classified, on the
basis of bleeding site, into anterior and posterior. The majority of
bleeds (over 90%) originate from the anterior caudal septum. This
location, with its thin mucosa, is predisposed to trauma such as local
irritation. Epistaxis may, however, be a sign of serious systemic
disease such as coagulopathy or vascular disorder such as hereditary
haemorrhagic telangiectasia (HHT). When dealing with severe epistaxis,
assessment of the vital signs, airway and circulation stability are more
important than the bleeding itself.

Possible Diagnoses Infants

Children

Common Coagulopathy (e.g. vitamin K deficiency) Iatrogenic (e.g.
nasogastric tube)

Digital trauma (e.g. nose picking) Inflammation (hay fever, infectious
rhinitis) Coagulopathy Foreign body Drugs (local decongestant, nasal
steroids, cocaine) Low ambient humidity

Rare HIV Congenital vascular abnormalities Choanal stenosis

Tumours (e.g. polyps, angio-fibroma) Chronic cocaine abuse Hypertension
Child abuse (physical abuse &lt;2 years of age) Ehlers-Danlos syndrome
HHT Ataxia-telangiectasia Migraine

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance History is diagnostic The only
symptom Severe epistaxis Likely recurrence Abnormal blood tests

Trauma

Inflammatory

Coagulopathy

Possible Yes Possible Yes No

Yes Possible No Possible No

Yes No Yes Yes Yes

Foreign Body Possible Possible Possible No No

Drugs Yes No No Possible Possible

Recommended Investigations ***  FBC: to check for haemoglobin in case
of massive bleeding; platelet count for thrombocytopenia
*** Coagulation screens with prothrombin time (for vitamin K
deficiency), partial thromboplastin time (to screen for haemophilia)

84

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

\*\*\* Further clotting studies if coagulation screens are abnormal
\*\*\* Imaging with CT scan or magnetic resonance imaging for severe and
frequent epistaxis

Top Tips • Epistaxis is usually self-limiting and requires no
investigation. Frequent and severe epistaxis should be investigated for
an underlying disorder such as coagulopathy or tumour. • Distinguishing
local from systemic causes of epistaxis is essential for applying
appropriate therapy. The child should undergo thorough physical
examination to exclude systemic disease such as coagulopathy, leukaemia
or von Willebrand disease. The parents will appreciate their child’s
blood pressure being checked as they may consider hypertension to be the
cause. • HHT is autosomal dominant with a prevalence of 1:5,000 people.
Telangiectasia can occur on oral or on nasal mucosa, face and fingers. •
In managing epistaxis, the nostrils should be compressed and the child
kept in an upright position with the head tilted forward to avoid blood
trickling posteriorly in the pharynx. If bleeding stops, the child is
sent home after 30 minutes of observation. If not, electrocoagulation or
silver nitrate cautery is applied.

Red Flags • Any epistaxis occurring under the age of 2 years,
particularly if severe, requires investigation to exclude systemic
diseases, e.g. blood dyscrasia. Urgent referral to an ear, nose and
throat specialist is indicated. • In adolescents with recurrent
epistaxis and nasal ulcers, consider the possibility of cocaine use. •
Although laypeople often associate epistaxis with hypertension, this is
rarely the case. Be aware, however, that anxiety from having epistaxis
may cause mild hypertension. • Be aware that epistaxis at night may
cause swallowing of blood, leading to haematemesis and/or melaena
occurring the next morning. • Epistaxis originating from the posterior
bleeding site is uncommon in children and is usually profuse;
inflammation or neoplasm should be excluded. • Be aware that massive
epistaxis is often the first and only symptom of HHT before the
appearance of the characteristic skin and mucosal membrane lesions
(occurring in 80%). Around 20% of patients have pulmonary arteriovenous
malformations (AVMs) that may present as stroke due to embolic abscess.
Disease complications may result in premature death. Screening for organ
involvement is essential (e.g. pulmonary, liver and gastrointestinal
AVM). • Juvenile nasal angiofibroma is a benign tumour of the
nasopharynx that usually presents with nasal obstruction and epistaxis.
The tumour may be mistaken as a nasal polyp. • While a foul-smelling or
blood-tinged unilateral discharge suggests a foreign body, particularly
in toddlers, a persistent bloody discharge always suggests tumour,
including malignancy.

FURTHER READING Beck R, Sorge M, Schneider A et al. General approach to
epistaxis treatment in primary and secondary care. Dtsch Arztebl Int
2018;115(1–2):12–22. De Gussem EM, Edwards CP, Hosman AE et al. Life
expectancy of patients with hereditary haemorrhagic telangiectasia.
Orphanet J Rare Dis 2016;11:46.

7

ORAL

BAD BREATH (HALITOSIS) Clinical Overview Halitosis (malodour) is the
third most frequent reason for attending dental care centres, after
tooth decay and gum disease. It is defined as an exhaled air containing
more than 75 parts per billion of odourproducing volatile sulphur
compounds (VSCs), which are generated by anaerobic bacteria located
principally on the back of the tongue. Halitosis is a symptom caused by
various conditions including poor oral hygiene, dry mouth, dental
diseases (particularly periodontal disease) and gastrointestinal and
pulmonary problems. The oral cavity (particularly on the dorsum of the
tongue and in areas between teeth) is the most common source of
halitosis and is responsible in about 85% of cases. Conditions that
predispose to halitosis include decrease in the flow of saliva, a high
amount of protein in the diet, a reduced amount of carbohydrates, dental
and gum diseases and prolonged intake of antibiotics.

Possible Diagnoses Infants

Children

Common Mouth inflammation Dehydration (e.g. fever) Certain foods (e.g.
spices) Medications Poor dental hygiene Oral candidiasis Rare
Gastro-intestinal diseases

Poor oral hygiene Dehydration (e.g. fever and mouth breathing)
Pharyngitis/tonsillitis Pseudo-halitosis Dental diseases

Gum diseases Medications Gastro-oesophageal reflux Bronchiectasis Eating
certain foods (e.g. garlic, spices) Nasal foreign body Respiratory,
liver, renal diseases

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance Poor Oral Hygiene Dehydration
Pharyngitis/Tonsillitis Pseudo-Halitosis Dental Diseases Dry
mouth/mucosa Fever Acute onset Normal smell Red inflamed mouth

Possible No No Possible No

Yes Possible Possible Possible Possible

Possible Yes Yes Possible Yes

No No No Yes No

Possible Possible Possible Possible Possible

85

86

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

Recommended Investigations \* Halimeter for measuring the level of VSCs
\* OralChroma to detect dimethyl sulphide

Top Tips • A child presenting with halitosis should be examined by
smelling his or her breath from a distance of 10–15 cm. The odour is
scored on a five-point scale. The tongue’s odour is measured by scraping
the back of the tongue with a plastic spoon and evaluating the smell on
the spoon. • Pseudo-halitosis is common and occurs when halitosis does
not actually exist but parents (and sometimes children themselves)
perceive it as such. Reassurance is all that is needed. • While the
Halimeter can detect VSCs for oral halitosis, the OralChroma can detect
dimethyl sulphide (produced during fermentation of beer) for extra-oral
halitosis. • Some medications (e.g. antihistamines, anti-cholinergics)
may cause dry mouth (xerostomia) with its complications such as taste
alteration, dental caries and halitosis. Other medications (e.g. chloral
hydrate, paraldehyde, cytotoxic drugs) are directly the cause of
halitosis. • The Halimeter is a useful device to confirm halitosis; the
measurement involves a flexible straw being inserted in the mouth or
nostril while the patient holds his or her breath. The measurement is in
parts per billion and any measurement more than 75 per billion is
diagnostic. • Be aware that the coating on the tongue is often the cause
of halitosis. Gentle daily cleaning of the dorsum of the tongue is
recommended. Oral hygiene is essential with toothbrushing and mouthwash
(e.g. with chlorhexidine). If xerostomia exists, plenty of sugar-free
fluids may stimulate the salivary flow.

Red Flags • Remember that fever is the most common cause of dry mouth
because of increased insensible perspiration. Extra cups of fluids are
beneficial for both the fever and the halitosis. • Be aware that
halitosis may be a clue to some serious underlying cause such as
bronchiectasis or nasal foreign body. • Unexplained oral and dental
trauma may be caused by physical and/or sexual child abuse.
Manifestations include oral bruising, abrasions and laceration of the
tongue, lips and frenum. Other features that may be caused by sexual
abuse include oral erythema, vesicles and ulcer. • If a Halimeter is
used to diagnose halitosis, make sure the device is specific for VSCs,
not for dimethyl sulphide, which also produces odour detectable by
another device (OralChroma).

FURTHER READING Bakhtiari S, Senatpour M, Mortazavi H et al. Oro-facial
manifestations of adverse reactions: A review study. Clujul Med
2018;91(1):27–36. Costacurta M, Benavoli D, Arcudi G et al. Oral and
dental signs of child abuse and neglect. Oral Implantol (Rome)
2015;8(2–3):68–73.

87

Oral

DENTAL CARIES Clinical Overview Dental caries is the most common chronic
infectious disease of childhood caused by the interaction of bacteria
(mainly Streptococcus mutans) and sugary foods on tooth enamel (Figure
7.1). These bacteria break down sugars, causing an acidic environment in
the oral cavity, resulting in demineralisation of the tooth enamel and
dental caries. The length of time of exposure of the teeth to sugars is
the crucial factor in the aetiology of dental caries. The World Health
Organisation recommends the intake of sugar should provide less than 10%
of energy intake, and even less than 5% of energy, to protect dental
health throughout life. Acids produced by bacteria after sugar intake
persist for 20–40 minutes. Dental caries cause pain, anxiety, time lost
at school, hospitalisation and negative impact on life, and are costly
to the healthcare system. Risk factors for dental caries include genetic
and racial factors, unavailability of water fluoride, poor oral hygiene
including toothbrushing, poverty, low level of education and
malocclusion of the teeth.

Possible Diagnoses Infants

Children

Common Early childhood caries (ECC) Incipient caries

ECC Incipient caries Arrested caries Recurrent caries Rampant caries

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance Infants/toddlers Related to bottle
feeding Previous history of caries Related to oral hygiene Drug related

FIGURE 7.1

ECC

Incipient Caries

Arrested Caries

Recurrent Caries

Rampant Caries

Yes Yes No No No

Yes Possible No No No

Possible Possible Possible Possible Possible

Possible Possible Yes Possible Possible

No No Possible Yes Yes

Caries and tooth decay.

88

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

Recommended Investigations \* Dental X-ray

Top Tips • ECC is defined as the presence of one or more decayed,
missing or filled tooth surface in any primary tooth in children younger
than 6 years of age. Arrested caries is a caries that was previously
demineralised but later re-mineralised before the cavity is formed.
Rampant caries is a severe form of caries affecting multiple surfaces
and many teeth. It is associated with dry mouth, poor oral hygiene and
drugs such as amphetamine. • ECC is identified as a white band of
demineralised enamel that quickly advances to obvious decay along the
gingival margin. • There is a positive correlation between dental caries
and body mass index (BMI). The lifestyle of obese children, including
sugary snack and soda taking, predisposes to dental caries later on in
life. Malnutrition causes decreased flow of the salivary glands that
predisposes to dental caries. • Sugars of grains, fruits, vegetables and
milk do not contribute to the development of dental caries because of
these items’ intrinsic structures. They also stimulate the salivary flow
that eliminates the sugars. The main cause of dental caries is the free
sugars that include monosaccharides (glucose, galactose, fructose) and
disaccharides added to the food by the manufacturer or consumed as
syrup, honey and fruit juices. • The best available evidence for the
role of sugar in causing dental caries comes from those countries which
have low dental caries when the free sugars are kept low (40–55
g/person/day).

Red Flags • Even mild dental caries in children is of concern because it
is a lifelong progressive disease. • Early caries can be a particularly
virulent form of caries, beginning soon after dental eruption,
progressing rapidly and having a lasting impact on both primary and
permanent dentition. • A decline in dental caries rates was found until
the mid-1980s; recently a reverse has been reported.

FURTHER READING Moynihan P. Sugars and dental caries: Evidence for
setting a recommended threshold for intake. Adv Nutr 2016;7(1):149–156.
Hooley M, Skouteris M, Cecile B et al. Body mass index and dental caries
in children and adolescents: A systematic review of literature published
2004 to 2011. Syst Rev 2012;1:57.

89

Oral

MOUTH BLEEDING Clinical Overview Mouth bleeding is common in the
paediatric population. It is usually mild, not life-threatening and the
cause is usually found locally. However, it is distressing for the
parents to witness. The most common cause is trauma such as cutting the
lip or mouth as a result of a fall or running into a solid object.
Another common cause is epistaxis dripping down the throat. Periodontal
diseases (affecting the gingiva, alveolar bone, cementum and periodontal
ligament) are other important causes of bleeding. Extra-oral causes of
mouth bleeding are uncommon and include serious underlying systemic
disorders such as thrombocytopenia, leukaemia, aplastic anaemia and von
Willebrand disease. These are particularly important if there is no
obvious local cause for the bleeding.

Possible Diagnoses Infants

Children

Common Trauma (including birth trauma) Candidiasis Liver cholestasis
Coagulopathy (e.g. haemophilia) Vitamin K deficiency (breastfed infants)
Rare Neonatal thrombocytopenia

Trauma Gingivitis Immune thrombocytopenia (ITP) Nosebleed Periodontitis

Drugs (e.g. methotrexate, aspirin) Von Willebrand disease Scurvy Child
abuse Hepatic failure Haemophilia Hereditary haemorrhagic telangiectasia

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance Purpura on skin Large bleed Diagnosis
by history Oral inflammatory changes Associated pain

Trauma

Gingivitis

Thrombocytopenia

Nosebleed

Periodontitis

Possible Possible Possible Possible

No No Possible Yes

Possible Possible Possible No

No Possible Possible No

No No No Yes

Yes

Possible

No

No

Possible

Recommended Investigations For systemic extra-oral causes of bleeding:
\*\*\* Full blood count (FBC): to exclude thrombocytopenia, aplastic
anaemia ***  First-stage tests: prothrombin time, partial
thromboplastin time, bleeding and clotting time; second-stage tests: von
Willebrand factor, fibrinogen and thrombin *** Liver function test for
suspected liver disease

90

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

Top Tips • Bleeding from vitamin K deficiency usually occurs within the
first 1–7 days of life and rarely as late as 12 weeks. Entirely
breastfed infants have a 20 times greater risk of such deficiency than
those receiving formula. • Bleeding from the gum or gingivitis is
usually due to poor oral hygiene. Prevention of bleeding rests on
promoting proper oral hygiene, e.g. regular teeth brushing and use of
dental floss. • The absence of a local source of bleeding in the mouth
is a very important clue for the presence of extra-oral sources such as
thrombocytopenia, von Willebrand disease or leukaemia. • ITP and von
Willebrand disease are among the most common haematological problems
affecting children. Affected children often present with oral bleeding.
• Oropharyngeal candidiasis does not bleed unless the white plaque is
removed from the underlying tissue, leaving pinpoint haemorrhages.

Red Flags • Blood from a nosebleed may flow down the throat and be
mistakenly considered as a mouth bleed. • Be aware of melaena caused by
continuous swallowing of oral bleeding that has gone unnoticed. • Be
aware that haematemesis may be caused by the swallowing of blood from
mouth bleeding. • Child abuse should always be considered as a possible
cause if an infant or young child presents with unexplained mouth injury
or the injury is not compatible with the history given. In such a case
the skin should be examined for bruises; skeletal survey may be
necessary. • Gingivitis with mouth bleeding may be the presenting
symptom of acute non-lymphoblastic leukaemia, thrombocytopenia or
neutropenia. Early diagnosis is crucial.

FURTHER READING McIntosh N. Incidence of oronasal haemorrhage in infancy
presenting to general practice in the UK. Br J Gen Pract
2008;58(557):877–879.

91

Oral

MOUTH ULCERS Clinical Overview Mouth ulceration is common in children.
It may be caused by trauma (physical or chemical), viral infections,
aphthous ulcers, dermatological or haematopoietic disorders,
gastrointestinal disease, nutritional deficiency or as a side effect of
drugs. Most acute mouth ulcers in young children (Figure 7.2) are caused
by viral infection, such as acute herpetic gingivostomatitis (AHG), or
trauma. Aphthous ulcers are more common in older children and adults
(affecting about 20% of the population), with a tendency to recur in
contrast to AHG. The appearance of mouth ulcers may be quite challenging
as they may be caused by serious systemic diseases such as inflammatory
bowel diseases, lymphoproliferative diseases, neutropenia, syphilis and
juvenile-onset systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE).

FIGURE 7.2

Gingivostomatitis.

Possible Diagnoses Infants

Children

Common AHG Medications Trauma (including child abuse) Exanthem (e.g.
varicella, measles) Neutropenia Rare Periodic fever syndrome (e.g.
periodic fever, aphthous stomatitis, pharyngitis and cervical adenitis
\[PFAPA\]) Hand-foot-mouth disease Neonatal lupus Neonatal syphilis
Nutrient deficiencies

AHG Hand-foot-mouth disease Herpangina Trauma (including child abuse,
chemical burns) Aphthous ulcers

Other viral infections (e.g. EBV) Inflammatory bowel disease (e.g.
Crohn’s disease) Neutropenia (cyclic, aplastic anaemia) Lichen planus
Fungal infection Erythema multiforme Medications (e.g. chemotherapy)
(Continued)

92

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

(Continued) Infants

Children Facial herpes zoster Histoplasmosis HIV infection Tuberculosis
Acute necrotising ulcerative gingivitis (ANUG) Periodic fever syndrome
(e.g. PFAPA) Behçet’s disease Oral sarcoidosis SLE Stevens-Johnson
syndrome Nutrient deficiencies (e.g. vitamin B12) Coeliac disease
Lymphoproliferative diseases, mouth cancer Reiter’s syndrome (uveitis,
conjunctivitis, arthritis)

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance Fever Affect the gingiva Size &lt;10
mm History of recurrence Extra-oral sites

AHG

Hand-Foot-Mouth

Herpangina

Trauma

Aphthous Ulcers

Yes Yes Yes

Possible Possible Yes

Yes No Yes

No Possible Possible

No Possible Possible

No No

No Yes

No No

Possible Possible

Yes No

Recommended Investigations ***  FBC: cyclic neutropenia, anaemia in
Crohn’s disease; leukopenia, anaemia and thrombocytopenia in SLE ***
C-reactive protein: elevated in bacterial infectious disease \*\*\*
Serological tests for HIV infection **  Dark field microscopy from
debris obtained from ANUG lesions will demonstrate spirochetes
**  Scraping for culture in suspected fungal infection; if positive,
tests for immunity

Top Tips • Benign aphthae tend to be small in size (&lt;1 cm) and
self-limiting in about 90% of cases, while large aphthae are often
associated with more serious disorders such as HIV infection. • The
presence of pain can be a helpful marker diagnostically: AHG, traumatic
and aphthous ulcers are painful; ulcers caused by SLE and
lymphoproliferative diseases are painless. • Differentiating herpangina
from AHG is usually easy: herpangina has more posterior lesions
(tonsils, tonsillar pillars, uvula, pharyngeal wall and soft palate),
while in AHG the lesions affect the cheeks, gingiva and tongue. • ANUG
is rare in healthy children but may occur in association with
malnutrition and poor oral hygiene. It is very painful, distinguishing
it from the common usually painless chronic gingivitis. There is also
bleeding and ulceration. It may mimic AHG. It can be caused by
spirochetes, and dark field microscopy will detect them. • Episodes of
PFAPA are characterised by attacks of unprovoked systemic inflammation
with periodic fever. Each episode is followed by a symptom-free interval
ranging in duration from weeks to months. Steroids are effective
therapy.

Oral

93

Red Flags • A child with atopic dermatitis who becomes infected with
herpes virus resulting in eczema herpeticum needs care. This is the most
serious manifestation of herpes virus and may be lethal. • Mouth ulcers
are common in Crohn’s disease, but rare in ulcerative colitis. Beware
that the mouth lesions may precede the intestinal manifestations
(prevalence estimated 20%–50%). • Multiple mouth ulcers may be the first
sign of neutropenia or aplastic anaemia. • Major aphthae, which are
difficult to heal, need dental consultation to exclude more serious
diseases such as HIV. Other manifestations of HIV include oral
candidiasis and periodontitis. • Initial symptoms and signs of leukaemia
may appear in the mouth due to leukaemic cell infiltration or associated
decrease of bone marrow elements such as low white blood cell or
platelet counts. • Beware of oral manifestations of child abuse. These
may include broken teeth, lip injury or tears to the lingual frenum.
Abuse should be considered if the injury is not compatible with the
history. • Oral gels, which are used to treat oral ulcers, may contain
salicylate salts. They should not be given to children under 12 years of
age as they may cause Reye’s syndrome.

FURTHER READING Mortazavi H, Safi Y, Baharrand M et al. Diagnostic
features of common oral ulcerative lesions: An update decision tree. Int
J Dent 3 October 2016. doi: 10.1155/2016/7278925

8

EAR

DEAFNESS/IMPAIRED HEARING Clinical Overview Hearing impairment is either
sensorineural or conductive. Conductive hearing impairment is common: At
least half of preschool children have one or more episodes of otitis
media with effusion (OME), which is often a cause of varying degrees of
hearing impairment, usually mild (26–40 dB). The incidence of congenital
sensorineural is approximately 1:1,000 in neonates, usually severe (50–
70 dB) or profound (&gt;70 dB). Cytomegalovirus (CMV) is the leading
non-genetic cause of this type of hearing loss. Risk factors include
genetic hearing loss, low gestation (&lt;32 weeks), pre-auricular pits
or tags, branchial cysts, heterochromia of the iris, prolonged jaundice,
ototoxic drugs, hypoxic ischaemic encephalopathy, congenital infections
(CMV, rubella, syphilis) and neonatal meningitis.

Possible Diagnoses Infants

Children

Common Congenital Birth asphyxia Drugs (ototoxic) Low gestation (&lt;32
weeks) Bacterial infection (e.g. meningitis) Viral infection (e.g.
cytomegalovirus) Cleft palate

OME (glue ears) Infection (e.g. following meningitis) Trauma (including
acoustic trauma) Drugs (ototoxic drugs) Genetic CMV

Rare Microtia Tumour Foreign body

Acoustic neuroma Osteopetrosis Histiocytosis Pendred syndrome
Osteogenesis imperfecta Lyme disease Waardenburg syndrome Alport
syndrome Otosclerosis (autosomal dominant) HIV infection

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance Severe/profound Congenital Likely
onset in special care baby unit Abnormal examination finding Detected by
screen

94

OME

Genetic

Trauma

Drugs

Post-Infection

No No No Yes No

Yes Yes No No Yes

Possible No No Yes No

Yes No Yes No Possible

Possible No Possible No Possible

Ear

95

Recommended Investigations \*\* Tympanogram: if flat, is likely to
indicate significant effusion in the middle ear \*\* Pure-tone
audiogram: for more mature and cooperative children

Top Tips • As parents may not recognise mild or high-frequency hearing
impairment and as hearing impairment has a major impact on the child’s
language and communication, screening testing during the neonatal period
is strongly advocated, and usually performed by the third day of life. •
Any child with congenital deafness should be tested for CMV infection as
this infection is the leading non-genetic cause of hearing loss. • The
most popular screening is evoked otoacoustic emissions (EOAE), which is
inexpensive and the results are easy to interpret. However, it has a
high failure rate (about 40%) for days 1 and 2 of life. • Children who
fail the EOAE test or those at risk (e.g. family history, intrauterine
infection or craniofacial anomalies) must be evaluated by ABR (auditory
brainstem response). • Although most OME are transient, some children
(e.g. those with Down syndrome or cleft palate) are at high risk of
developing persistent effusion. • Although the insertion of grommets for
OME is effective in improving language acquisition, this effect lasts as
long as the grommets are patent. Long-term benefits are not certain.
Antibiotics, antihistamines, decongestants and steroids are usually
ineffective.

Red Flags • Congenital deafness due to congenital infection or
genetically determined impairment may escape neonatal screening testing
and deteriorate during the first 2 years of life. • A child with
unilateral progressive deafness, vertigo and tinnitus should be
suspected as having acoustic neuroma. Children with neurofibromatosis
are at higher risk of developing this tumour. • For any child who
presents with psychosocial problems (e.g. hyperactivity and conduct
problems) or delayed language and communication, a hearing test is
essential. • When parents suspect that their child’s hearing is
inadequate or delayed, this must be taken seriously. A rapid referral to
an audiological centre should be made. • Although OME is common, it
reduces the conduction sounds entering the ear for up to 40 dB, thus
delaying the crucial years of language acquisition. • An 18-month-old
child who has not said a single word with meaning or a 24-month-old
child with a single-word vocabulary of less than 10 words should be
referred for audiological assessment. • Exposure to high-intensity sound
(80–100 dB in rock music) can cause temporary hearing loss. Sudden and
very loud sound &gt;140 dB (gunfire, bombs) may cause permanent hearing
loss after one exposure.

FURTHER READING Hogan SC, Moore DR. Impaired binaural hearing in
children produced by a threshold level of middle ear disease. J Assoc
Res Otolaryngol 2003;4(2):123–129.

96

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

DIZZINESS AND VERTIGO Clinical Overview Dizziness is difficult to
differentiate from vertigo in young children, so the two conditions are
joined in this section. Dizziness refers to a sensation of unsteadiness
without the perception that the surroundings are rotating. Orthostatic
hypotension is a prototype of this category. In true vertigo (such as
vestibular neuritis) an older child not only complains of instability,
but also has the feeling of spinning or turning. A young child with
vertigo is usually noted to appear pale and frightened and/ or suddenly
fall onto the ground, losing balance, stumbling or being clumsy. There
is no associated hearing loss. The underlying cause is in the
equilibratory pathway (vestibule, semicircular canals, eighth nerve,
vestibular nuclei in the brainstem and eyes). Vertigo is not a common
complaint in children, in contrast to adults. Fortunately, most causes
of childhood vertigo are self-limiting.

Possible Diagnoses Infants

Children

Common Physiological (10–18 months of age) Cerebral degeneration Drugs
(e.g. sedative, antihistamine) Middle ear infection

Rare Cerebellar tumour

Benign paroxysmal vertigo of childhood (BPVC) Acute middle ear
disease/eustachian tube dysfunction Vestibular neuritis Labyrinthitis
Migraine

Orthostatic hypotension (not true vertigo) Head injury Eustachian tube
disease Tumours (acoustic neuroma, cerebellar) Hypoglycaemia Psychogenic
Fistula between the middle and inner ear Chronic otitis media (OM),
mastoiditis Drugs (e.g. antidepressants, antihistamines) Epilepsy
(temporal lobe epilepsy) Cholesteatoma Benign paroxysmal positional
vertigo (BPPV) Ménière’s disease Epidemic vertigo (caused by a virus,
following upper respiratory tract infection \[URTI\])

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance True vertigo Paroxysmal Nystagmus
Fever Hearing loss

BPVC

Middle Ear Disease

Vestibular Neuritis

Migraine

Labyrinthitis

Yes Yes Yes No No

Possible No No Yes Possible

Yes Yes Yes No No

Yes Yes Yes No No

Yes Yes Yes Possible Yes

97

Ear

Recommended Investigations ** ** ** ** ** **

Audiogram to assess the ear function Tympanometry to evaluate ear
function Electroencephalogram if there is a suspicion of epilepsy, such
as loss of consciousness Cranial MRI if trigeminal neuralgia is
suspected Ice water caloric testing to confirm the abnormal vestibular
function Cranial MRI to assess for an intracranial lesion

Top Tips • Testing the vestibular nerve (VN) is done by holding the
child in the arms and rotating him or her clockwise and anticlockwise.
The normal eye deviation in the direction of rotation and nystagmus in
the opposite direction is absent in case of VN dysfunction. • BPPV and
Ménière’s disease are the most common causes of vertigo in adults. In
children, BPVC, vestibular migraine and vestibular neuritis are the most
common causes of vertigo. • BPVC is characterised by recurrent attacks
of vertigo occurring without warning and resolving spontaneously. It is
considered as a migraine precursor. Attacks occur mainly in toddlers and
are usually triggered by sudden change of the head. After a few seconds
there is a sudden onset of pallor, unsteadiness, crying for help,
clinging to the mother, or refusing to walk, often with vomiting and
horizontal nystagmus. Episodes may last up to 30 seconds and recur in
days or weeks. • Currently, BPPV, benign paroxysmal torticollis, cyclic
vomiting and abdominal migraine are identified as periodic syndromes and
precursors of migraine. • Vestibular migraine is a common cause of
episodic vertigo combining typical symptoms of migraine with vestibular
signs (imbalance, tinnitus, nystagmus) lasting 5 minutes to 72 hours. •
The most common cause of dizziness in young children is middle
ear/eustachian tube dysfunction; in older children and adolescents it is
orthostatic hypotension, which manifests as feeling unsteady or fainting
when getting up from sleep or long sitting. • Unless the cause of the
vertigo is clear (e.g. OM, BPVC), close cooperation between different
specialists (e.g. otologist, neurologist, sometimes ophthalmologist and
psychiatrist) is essential to establish early diagnosis and management.

Red Flags • In a child presenting with unremitting vertigo and
nystagmus, check for deafness and neurological signs to exclude acoustic
neuroma or cerebral degenerative disease. • Any history of impaired or
loss of consciousness in association with vertigo should alert the
clinician that the attack could be epileptic (temporal lobe epilepsy). •
Be aware that a young child with BPVC may not complain of dizziness but
rather express fear and become pale, unsteady and clumsy.

FURTHER READING Gasani AP, Dallan I, Navari E et al. Vertigo in
children: Proposal for diagnostic algorithm based upon clinical
experience. Acta Otorhinolaryngol Ital 2015;35(3):180–185. Tatli B,
Gueler S. Non-epileptic events in childhood. Turk Pediatr Ars
2017;52(2):59–65.

98

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

EARACHE (OTALGIA) Clinical Overview This is one of the most common
reasons for seeking medical attention. The pain usually arises from
inflammation in the middle or external canal of the ear. In infancy, the
pain usually manifests as irritability and tenderness when the ear is
rubbed or touched. In contrast to adults, referred pain from outside the
ears is common in paediatrics, occurring via five main sources: the
trigeminal nerve (sensory distribution of the face); the facial nerve
(teeth, most commonly the upper molars or temporomandibular joint); the
glossopharyngeal nerve (tonsillitis, pharyngitis); the vagus nerve
(laryngopharynx or oesophagus); or second to third cervical vertebrae.
In these cases patients have a normal otological examination.

Possible Diagnoses Infants

Children

Common Infective OM Infective otitis externa Trauma (cauliflower ear)
Barotitis media (aerotitis) Infected eczematous dermatitis Rare
Furunculosis Acute cellulitis of the auricle

Infective OM Infective otitis externa Referred pain (toothache,
tonsillopharyngitis) Trauma (including foreign body) Barotitis media
(e.g. flying)

Cholesteatoma Mastoiditis Trigeminal neuralgia Temporomandibular
arthritis Ramsay Hunt syndrome (herpes zoster oticus)
Perichondritis/chondritis Bullous myringitis Exostoses and osteoma
Impacted cerumen

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance

Fever Associated URTI Abnormal eardrum Being infant Tender on touch

Infective OM

Infective External Otitis (EO)

Referred Pain

Trauma

Barotitis

Yes Yes Yes Yes Possible

Possible No No Possible Yes

Possible No No Possible No

No No No Possible Possible

No No No Possible No

Recommended Investigations *   Full blood count: leukocytosis
&gt;15,000 may suggest bacterial infection, including occult infection
*\*\* If ear discharge is present, a swab is indicated to identify the
organism \*\*\* X-ray and/or CT of the mastoid bone to exclude
mastoiditis

Ear

99

Top Tips • When a child presents with otalgia in one ear, always examine
first the ear that does not hurt. • While perichondritis indicates
infection of the surrounding tissue of the auricular cartilage (the
outer third of the ear canal), chondritis indicates infection of the
cartilage itself. This is usually caused by trauma, such as ear
piercing. • Barotitis occurs through damage to the middle ear due to
ambient pressure changes. This may occur during a sudden ambient
pressure increase following descent of an airplane or deep sea diving in
the presence of dysfunctional eustachian tube by URTI. • Ramsay Hunt
syndrome usually presents with severe ear pain. Vesicles on the pinna
and in the external auditory canal in the distribution of the sensory
branch of the facial nerve are seen. • Note that furunculosis, caused by
Staphylococcus aureus infection, can affect only the cartilaginous outer
hair-containing third of the ear.

Red Flags • The tympanic membrane of a crying baby is often red on
inspection; do not misdiagnose OM. • In neonates, trauma to the pinna
may present as haematoma with evolution to cauliflower ear. Immediate
needle aspiration of the haematoma is necessary to prevent
perichondritis, which can be refractory. • Infection of the middle ear
nowadays is usually caused by a viral infection. Simple pain relievers
such as paracetamol or ibuprofen can provide relief. Do not give
aspirin! • Ramsay Hunt syndrome, caused by herpes zoster virus, often
causes hearing loss and facial palsy and may be permanent (in 50%). In
immunocompromised individuals, infection is serious. • Remember that
some topical otic preparations (neomycin, colistin, polymyxin), used to
treat OE, can cause contact dermatitis which manifests as erythema,
vesiculation and oedema. • Parents should be advised to be cautious
flying if their child has an URTI or allergy as the relative negative
pressure in the middle ear may result in retraction of the tympanic
membrane, causing pain and possibly bleeding in the middle ear.

FURTHER READING Minovi A, Dazert S. Diseases of the middle ear in
childhood. GMC Curr Top Otorhinolaryngol Head Neck Surg 2014;13:Doc11.

100

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

EAR DISCHARGE Clinical Overview OM is the most common cause of ear
discharge in paediatrics. Its occurrence has become a less seen symptom
in recent years mainly because of widespread vaccination, effective
antibiotics and better living standards. Children are at high risk for
OM and ear discharge if they are in a smoking environment, attend a day
care centre, have frequent colds or have allergic rhinitis or adenoid
hypertrophy. Risk factors in neonates include nasotracheal intubation
for more than 7 days, cleft palate and prematurity. Any ear discharge
has to be differentiated from earwax (light, dark or orange brown,
normal odour) and water that entered the ear canal during showering or
swimming.

Possible Diagnoses Infants

Children

Common Suppurative otitis media Infective otitis externa Haemorrhagic
diathesis (disseminated intravascular coagulation)

Suppurative OM Infective otitis external Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Otorrhoea from tympanostomy tube Trauma

Rare Congenital cholesteatoma

Acquired cholesteatoma Infected foreign body Otorrhoea (cerebrospinal
fluid \[CSF\]) Herpes zoster Mastoiditis Tumour (e.g. rhabdomyosarcoma,
eosinophilic granuloma)

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance

Fever Associated URTI Purulent Normal eardrum Associated skin lesions

OM

OE

Seborrhoeic Dermatitis

Otorrhoea Ear Tube

Trauma

Yes Yes Yes No No

Possible No Yes Yes No

No No No Yes Yes

No No Yes Yes No

No No No Possible No

Recommended Investigations \*\*\* Culture of the infected discharge to
identify the organisms \*\*  High-resolution computed tomography (HRCT)
or MRI if the symptom persists

Ear

101

Top Tips • Current clinical studies do not recommend immediate
antibiotic therapy in most children with uncomplicated OM. Therapy is
indicated for children younger than 6 months, moderate to severe otalgia
and fever &gt;39.0°C, persistent otorrhoea and high-risk individuals
(e.g. Down’s syndrome). • After an acute OM, about 40% of children
develop OME that persists for a month; 10% have a persistent OME after 3
months. • Following tympanostomy tube insertion for OME, at least 50% of
children develop ­otorrhoea through the tube while the tube is properly
in place and patent. • The most serious complication of OM is
intracranial suppurative infections including meningitis, subdural
empyema and otogenic brain abscess. • Otitis externa (OE), also called
swimmer’s ear, tends to recur in children who swim. Instillation of 2%
acetic acid immediately after swimming is the most effective prevention.
During and after an acute OE, children should not swim and the ears
should be protected from water during bathing.

Red Flags • If otorrhoea persists despite adequate antibiotic cover,
cholesteatoma or rhabdomyosarcoma should be suspected. Hearing loss and
facial palsy are often present. • Clear discharge from the ear may be
CSF resulting from basilar skull fracture or inner ear malformation.
This otogenic CSF leak is potentially life-threatening because of
meningitis risk. • Bloody discharge may follow a direct trauma; a
foreign object in the ear canal and, rarely, a tumour should be
excluded. • Foreign-body insertion into the ear is common. Its
extraction by a non-otolaryngologist is associated with numerous
complications such as eardrum perforation and hearing loss, unless it is
easily graspable.

FURTHER READING Olajuyin O, Olatunja OS. Aural foreign body extraction
in children: A double-edged sword. Pan Afr Med J 2015;20:186.

9

EYE

ACUTE RED EYE Clinical Overview Acute red eye is common and caused by a
variety of conditions including trauma such as a foreign body (FB),
diseases of the conjunctiva (conjunctivitis), cornea (keratitis), iris,
ciliary body and choroid (uveitis), aqueous humour (glaucoma) and sclera
(scleritis and episcleritis). Clinicians should be able to diagnose most
common eye diseases, which include allergic conjunctivitis (often
seasonal with significant itching, runny nose, swollen lids and positive
family history; Figure 9.1), and viral conjunctivitis (with its redness
all over the conjunctiva, watery discharge often beginning in one eye,
usually caused by adenovirus). Bacterial conjunctivitis is commonly
caused by chlamydia in neonates and by staphylococci in older children.
It usually produces redness, maximal at the inferior conjunctiva, and
purulent discharge or keratitis with redness surrounding the cornea. Any
eye redness in neonates or infants requires the exclusion of
nasolacrimal duct obstruction and subconjunctival haemorrhage, which may
result from injury, inflammation, severe straining, sneezing or
coughing. Referral to an ophthalmologist is indicated whenever the
diagnosis is unclear.

Possible Diagnoses Infants

Children

Common Lacrimal duct obstruction Chlamydia conjunctivitis Episcleral
haemorrhage during birth Chemical conjunctivitis Bacterial
conjunctivitis Rare Gonococcal conjunctivitis Allergic conjunctivitis
Dacryocystitis

102

Viral conjunctivitis Bacterial conjunctivitis Allergic conjunctivitis
Keratitis (e.g. herpetic keratitis, contact lens keratitis) Trauma (e.g.
FB)

Conjunctivitis associated with systemic diseases Acute uveitis
Dacryocystitis Chemical conjunctivitis Epidemic keratoconjunctivitis
(EKC) Haemorrhagic conjunctivitis Glaucoma Endophthalmitis (a bacterial
infection) Vernal conjunctivitis Syphilitic interstitial keratitis
Haemorrhagic conjunctivitis (e.g. caused by picornavirus) Biotinidase
deficiency (resulting in biotin deficiency) Cogan’s syndrome
(interstitial keratitis with hearing loss) Membranous and
pseudo-membranous conjunctivitis Chalazion and hordeolum

103

Eye

FIGURE 9.1

Conjunctivitis.

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance Unilateral Blurred vision Associated
pain Discharge Itchy

Viral Conjunctivitis

Bacterial Conjunctivitis

Allergic Conjunctivitis

Keratitis

Trauma

Possible No No Yes No

Possible No Possible Yes No

Yes No No No Yes

Possible Yes Yes Yes Possible

No Possible Yes Possible Possible

Recommended Investigations If the diagnosis of conjunctivitis in
children is clear, laboratory testing, such as culture, is usually not
necessary as conjunctivitis is common and harmless. Infection of the
cornea by herpes virus produces branch-like (dendritic) lesions, which
are demonstrated by fluorescein staining. \*\* Full blood count (FBC):
leukocytosis for bacterial infection \*\*  Anti-nuclear antibodies
(ANA) and rheumatoid factor for children with rheumatoid arthritis
\*\*\* Swab for purulent and severe discharge to exclude chlamydia or
gonococcal infection *** Imaging of the orbit with magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) for any tumour such as rhabdomyosarcoma *** Tonometry to
measure eye pressure for suspected glaucoma

Top Tips • Episcleral and retinal haemorrhages in neonates are common
after vaginal delivery. Although these seem alarming to parents and
clinicians, they are harmless and disappear within 2 weeks. • Ophthalmia
neonatorum refers to inflammation of the conjunctiva within the first
month of life. Once principally caused by gonococcal infection, the most
common causes are now chlamydia, staphylococci and chemical
conjunctivitis caused by the topical antimicrobial

104

•

• • • • •

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

agent silver nitrate. The latter agent reduced the incidence of
gonococcal ophthalmia from 10% to 0.3% in 1881. At birth, the
nasolacrimal duct is often blocked, and the diagnosis is made by the
history or by refluxing discharge with a pressure over the lacrimal sac.
This resolves spontaneously in more than 95% over a few months, rarely
delayed until the age of 1 year and rarely needing surgery. Gonococcal
conjunctivitis presents in the first few days of life with a rapidly
progressive profuse purulent discharge. The cornea is rapidly affected.
Urgent treatment with antibiotics is needed. Measurement of visual
acuity is needed for keratitis, not for conjunctivitis. Uveitis presents
with pain, lacrimation, photophobia and conjunctival hyperaemia. It
occurs mainly in children with a mono-articular or pauci-articular form
of rheumatoid arthritis. Children with glaucoma usually present with
corneal irritation (tearing, photophobia), conjunctival injection and
visual impairment. The most important sign is corneal enlargement.
Systemic diseases associated with conjunctivitis include Kawasaki
disease, StevensJohnson syndrome and Lyme disease. They are
characterised by greater bulbar than palpebral involvement and no eye
discharge. In contrast, infectious conjunctivitis has more palpebral
involvement.

Red Flags • Conjunctivitis in neonates may be caused by sexually
transmitted diseases acquired during vaginal delivery. Ensure you do not
miss chlamydia or gonococcal infection. • Ophthalmia neonatorum is a
potentially blinding disease; it needs urgent diagnosis. • Chlamydia is
the most common cause of bacterial neonatal conjunctivitis in England.
Although it is often harmless, 10%–20% of infants experience chlamydial
pneumonia, which is a serious disease. Therefore, infants should receive
topical as well as systemic antibiotics. • Bilateral redness of the eyes
may suggest viral or allergic conjunctivitis, while unilateral redness
often suggests FB, which can be detected by everting the upper lid to
check for concealed FB. • Pain is not usually caused by conjunctivitis,
but rather by uveitis, keratitis, glaucoma or scleritis. • EKC is highly
infectious, caused by adenovirus type 8. Hygienic measures, e.g. hand
washing, are essential to prevent spread of the disease. • A child with
red eyes and impaired vision is unlikely to have conjunctivitis.
Keratitis is more likely. Ask whether there is a ‘gritty sensation’,
which occurs with keratitis. • Steroids should never be prescribed for
red eyes unless herpes infection is excluded. If diagnosis is not clear,
referral to an ophthalmologist is indicated. • Orbital cellulitis
presents as red and swollen eye and must be differentiated from
rhabdomyosarcoma, which is a very aggressive malignancy of embryonic
muscle tissue within the orbit. The tumour is often curable with
radiation and radiotherapy.

FURTHER READING Chawla R, Kellner JD, Astle W. Acute infectious
conjunctivitis in children. Paediatr Child Health 2001;6(6):329–335.

105

Eye

ACUTE AND TRANSIENT LOSS OF VISION Clinical Overview Visual loss may be
acute or gradual, temporary or permanent. Acute visual loss is a
frightening experience not only for children and their parents but also
for clinicians. Conditions causing acute visual loss in paediatrics are
collectively uncommon (incidence estimated to be 2–5 cases per 10,000
births). It is due to either abnormalities within the ocular structure
(cornea, lens, vitreous and retina) or neural visual pathways in the
central nervous system (optic nerve, chiasm and cortical area). Visual
loss within the eyes is easy to detect, e.g. corneal opacity, cataract
or optic atrophy. Most causes of cortical visual loss occur in children
with neurodisability such as asphyxia at birth, in association with
seizures, spasticity or hypotonia. Rarely cortical visual loss occurs as
an isolated neurological phenomenon. This section discusses acute and
transient visual loss only.

Possible Diagnoses Infants

Children

Common Eye injury (birth trauma) Birth asphyxia (hypoxic-ischaemic)
Hypoperfusion (anaemia, hypotension) Thrombosis (e.g. polycythaemia)
Drugs (e.g. gentamicin)

Migraine Uveitis Infection (e.g. trachoma, meningitis, keratitis)
Thromboembolic phenomenon Raised intracranial pressure (ICP) (tumour,
pseudotumour cerebri)

Rare Toxoplasmosis, rubella, cytomegalovirus and herpes (TORCH)
infection HIV infection Retinal detachment Congenital varicella

Trauma (e.g. intracranial haemorrhage, stroke) Occipital lobe seizures
Amaurosis fugax Macular degeneration Optic neuritis Acute glaucoma HIV
infection Retinal migraine, arterial or venous occlusion Conversion
symptom (hysteria) Cortical blindness Familial transient visual loss
Postprandial transient visual loss Unexplained

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance Sudden onset Monocular With headache
Recurrence Severe vision loss

Migraine

Uveitis

Infection

Thromboembolic

Raised ICP

Yes No Yes Yes No

Possible Yes Possible Possible No

Yes Possible Possible No Possible

Yes Yes Possible Possible Possible

Possible No Yes No No

106

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

Recommended Investigations **  TORCH screening test (polymerase chain
reaction and serological tests for cytomegalovirus, herpes simplex
virus, rubella virus) **\* HIV DNA detected by polymerase chain reaction
*** Orbital ultrasonography and computed tomography (CT) scan of the
eye and head for suspected tumour *** Electroencephalogram (EEG) for
cases with seizures \*\*   Electroretinography for retinal causes of
visual loss

Top Tips • Eye examination is an essential part of neonatal examination,
including using an ophthalmoscope at a distance of 20–25 cm to look for
the red reflex. Fundoscopy is usually unnecessary. • In ophthalmology,
more than in any other specialty, observation is the most important
technique to detect abnormalities. Get the child interested in visual
toys and games such as a bright red object or the light source of a
torch. • Although children with eye problems are often referred to an
ophthalmologist, clinicians should be able to perform certain eye
examinations. These include examination of the visual fields (looking
for wiggling fingers), cornea light reflex, cover tests and fundoscopy.
Visual acuity is tested by the child’s ability to fixate on and follow
an object (such as a brightly coloured toy). • The most common cause for
transient visual loss in children occurs during a visual aura of a
classic migraine. Aura is defined by the International Headache Society
as a recurrent disorder that develops over 5–29 minutes and lasts for
less than 1 hour. • Transient monocular visual loss lasting 1–5 minutes
is usually referred to as amaurosis fugax resulting from cerebral
ischaemia (seizure, stroke). While migraine aura may present with
flashes of light (photopsia), amaurosis fugax presents as blackout of
vision or a curtain across the vision.

Red Flags • Be aware that a child with leukocoria, a white pupil, has a
major clinical implication: the likely cause is either retinoblastoma or
cataract. Untreated or with delayed treatment, the retinoblastoma will
lead to death and cataract to permanent vision loss. • Be aware of the
long-term use of steroids that can cause cataract and glaucoma. •
Conditions causing sudden loss of vision: migraine or amaurosis fugax;
thromboembolic events may occur in predisposed conditions such as
polycythaemia, sickle-cell anaemia, and homocystinuria. • Be aware that
migraine occurring within 1 hour of visual loss is typical for retinal
migraine. • Any red eyes should not be treated with topical steroids
before herpes keratitis is excluded. • Occipital seizures (such as
benign partial epilepsy with occipital paroxysm) are not rare; visual
symptoms are prominent and include amaurosis, multi-coloured illusions
or hallucinations and eye deviation, followed by hemiclonic seizures or
automatisms. EEG is usually diagnostic. • While papilloedema is a
cardinal sign of increased ICP, in infants, separation of the cranial
sutures and bulging of the anterior fontanelle decompress the ICP;
papilloedema is not seen.

FURTHER READING Smith JA, Mackensen F, Sen HN et al. Epidemiology and
course of disease in childhood uveitis. Ophthalmology
2009;116(8):1544–1551.

107

Eye

DOUBLE VISION (DIPLOPIA) Clinical Overview Diplopia – simultaneous
perception of two images of a single object – is less common in children
than in adults because of the lower incidence of strokes and other
intracranial lesions. The most common cause of diplopia in children is
misalignment of the visual axes, occurring particularly in disorders
affecting the cranial nerves (third, fourth and sixth) innervating the
six ocular muscles. Other causes involve mechanical interference with
ocular motion or disorder of neuromuscular transmission. Diplopia is
either binocular (true diplopia) or monocular. The latter is caused by
abnormality in the cornea (e.g. severe astigmatism, irregular
curvature), in the lens (e.g. cataract, dislocated lens) or in the
vitreous humour (e.g. vitreous cysts). Diplopia is often the first
manifestation of many systemic muscular or neurologic disorders, some of
a serious nature, so prompt evaluation is usually required. A detailed
history and examination will make it possible to determine which muscles
and ocular nerves are affected and what is the likely cause. Although
diplopia does occur in infants, they do not usually present with
diplopia and therefore the causes in infants are not included in this
section.

Possible Diagnoses Children Common Physiological Strabismus
(particularly paralytic) Post-surgery for refractive errors Raised ICP
Myasthenia gravis (MG) Rare Trauma Drugs (e.g. anti-epileptics)
Ophthalmoplegic migraine Thyroid ophthalmopathy Retinoblastoma
Conversion symptom (hysteria) Basilar artery migraine Möbius syndrome
Stroke Sarcoidosis

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance Normal eyes Associated ptosis With
headache/vomiting Associated squint The only symptom

Physiological

Strabismus

Post-Surgery

ICP

Myasthenia

Yes No No No Yes

No No No Yes No

No Possible No Possible No

No Possible Yes Possible No

Yes Yes No No Possible

108

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

Recommended Investigations **   Urine and plasma amino acid analysis
**\* IV injection of short-acting edrophonium (Tensilon) to reverse the
symptoms of MG \*\*\* Anti-acetylcholine antibodies in plasma for
suspected MG \*\*\* Thyroid function tests for suspected cases of
hyperthyroidism \*\*\* A chest X-ray for suggested case of sarcoidosis
to show bilateral hilar lymphadenopathy \*\*\* Cranial MRI may show
tumour, area of infarction or even arterial aneurysm \*\*\*
Electromyogram (EMG) may be diagnostic in cases of MG

Top Tips • Physiological diplopia is a common and normal phenomenon in
which objects not within the area of fixation (in the front or behind)
are seen as double. • Monocular ptosis is easily diagnosed. If diplopia
persists with one eye occluded, the patient has monocular diplopia, the
causes of which are ophthalmological, usually refractory error.
Binocular diplopia resolves when one eye is occluded, usually caused by
misalignment of the visual axes. • The most common cause of diplopia is
strabismus. However, the brain of a young child learns how to suppress
the image of the weaker, misaligned eye. Therefore, diplopia is usually
not the presenting complaint in young age. • Differentiating monocular
from binocular diplopia is simple: covering each eye will correct
diplopia in binocular while diplopia persists in the monocular of the
affected eye. • Ophthalmoplegic migraine presents as third-nerve palsy
ipsilateral to the hemicranial headache due to vasoconstriction during
the attack to this nerve. • Diplopia may be the first complaint in
children with dislocated lens, occurring in Marfan’s syndrome (excessive
height, dilated aortic route) or homocystinuria (malar flush,
neurodisability, thromboembolic events).

Red Flags • Any diplopia warrants prompt evaluation; it may signal a
serious intracranial disease. • Although diplopia is a common symptom in
posterior fossa tumour, children rarely complain of it, as they are able
to suppress the image of the affected eye. Instead, head tilting or
turning may occur in an attempt to align the two images. • Beware that
fourth-nerve palsy typically presents with head tilting opposite to the
affected eye, while the head turns toward the affected eye in
sixth-nerve palsy. • Basilar arterial migraine (diplopia, vertigo,
ataxia and headache) should be differentiated from intracranial tumour.
An urgent CT scan or MRI is needed, particularly if it is the first
episode. • Diplopia and ptosis may be due to third-nerve palsy or
Horner’s syndrome. Small pupil and reduced sweating on the affected side
will help to differentiate both conditions. • Remember that the sixth
cranial nerve has a long intracranial course so it is susceptible to the
effects of raised ICP. • Adolescents with hysteria may present with
diplopia; this diagnosis should be one of exclusion.

FURTHER READING Danchaivijitr C, Kennard C. Diplopia and eye movement
disorders. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 2004;75(Suppl 4):24–31.

109

Eye

EYELID DISORDERS AND PTOSIS Clinical Overview Eyelid disorders are
exceedingly common in children and range from benign and self-resolving
to serious malignant or metastatic processes. Although the majority of
these disorders are dealt with by ophthalmologists, this section only
stresses those disorders that are important to clinicians in relation to
associated systemic diseases. Blepharoptosis, commonly abbreviated as
ptosis, is defined as an abnormally low-lying upper eyelid margin on
gaze. Eyelid elevation is primarily provided by levator palpebrae
superioris muscle with its function to lift the upper eyelid by 5 mm or
greater. Congenital ptosis is usually caused by levator muscle
dysgenesis. An acquired ptosis may be due to third-nerve palsy, caused
by MG, myotonic dystrophy, botulism or Horner’s syndrome. Therefore, the
diagnosis of any eyelid abnormality requires thorough systemic
examination and investigations to exclude systemic diseases.

Possible Diagnoses Infants

Children

Common Coloboma Congenital ptosis Congenital ectropion Tumour
(haemangioma, dermoid cyst) Congenital Horner’s syndrome Rare Congenital
core myopathy Congenital entropion Congenital muscular dystrophy
Congenital MG

Congenital ptosis Acquired ptosis Acquired Horner’s syndrome (with
miosis, anhidrosis) Tumour/cyst (e.g. haemangioma, cyst, mechanical
ptosis) Acute blepharitis

Meibomian cyst Chalazion (inflammation of the meibomian cyst) Myasthenia
gravis (MG) Myotonic muscular dystrophy (Steinert’s disease) Muscular
dystrophy (facioscapulohumeral type) Blepharophimosis Marcus Gunn
jaw-winking phenomenon Sparse or absent eyebrows (ectodermal dysplasia)
Lash abnormalities Eyebrow abnormalities Mitochondrial disorders

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance Bilateral The only finding
Inflammatory changes Progressive Amblyopia

Congenital Ptosis

Acquired Ptosis

Horner’s Syndrome

Tumour

Acute Blepharitis

Possible Yes No No No

Possible No No Possible Possible

Possible No No Possible Possible

No No Possible Yes Possible

Possible Possible Yes Possible No

110

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

Recommended Investigations \*\*\* Creatine phosphokinase in blood for
muscular diseases *** Anti-acetylcholine and muscle-specific kinase
(MUSK) antibodies in plasma for suspected MG *** A chest X-ray in cases
of MG for evidence of enlarged thymus and thymoma \*\* ECG for cases of
muscular dystrophy and myopathies \*\*\* CT scan of the anterior
mediastinum to assess the thymus (thymoma) \*\*\* EMG for suspected
cases of MG or myotonic dystrophy \*\*\* If MG is suspected, consider
referral for neostigmine or edrophonium testing

Top Tips • When children raise the eyebrows or lift the chin to look
around, this may be because of ptosis in an attempt to maintain
binocular vision. • Telecanthus (increased width between the medial
canthi) and epicanthus inversus (epicanthic folds originating from the
lower lid) can cause ptosis. The latter may be inherited as autosomal
dominant; affected females are often infertile. • Children with ptosis
should be referred for ophthalmic opinion and surgery if they have
abnormal head posture, amblyopia and abnormal visual field, and if it is
cosmetically unacceptable. • In Marcus Gunn jaw-winking (5% of all cases
with ptosis), the upper lid rises as the jaw opens. This is caused by
synkinesis between the third and fifth cranial nerves. • Eyebrow
abnormalities include sparse or absent eyebrows (e.g. alopecia,
ectodermal dysplasia) and eyebrows joining together medially
(Waardenburg or Cornelia de Lange syndrome).

Red Flags • Ptosis can be due to congenital Horner’s syndrome that is
associated with vertebral anomalies. The acquired type may be the first
presentation of mediastinal tumour such as neuroblastoma. • There is a
high incidence of amblyopia in ptosis due to occlusive stimulus
deprivation. • Beware that entropion (inward-turning of the lid margin
and lashes, trichiasis) often presents with irritability and can cause
corneal damage. Urgent consultation with an ophthalmologist is required.
Larsen syndrome (entropion, multiple joint dislocations, cleft palate
and neurodisability) has to be excluded. • Patients with ectropion
(outward-turning of the lid margin) are at risk of exposure keratopathy,
overflow of tears and conjunctivitis. This may occur in association with
facial palsy resulting from weakness of the orbicularis muscle. Again,
urgent ophthalmic consultation is required. • When the edrophonium
(Tensilon) test is carried out to confirm MG, the facility for
cardiopulmonary resuscitation must be available. Prior to the test, the
ptosis and strabismus are measured.

FURTHER READING Jubbal KT, Kania K, Brawn TL et al. Pediatric
blepharoptosis. Semin Plast Surg 2017;31(1):58–64.

111

Eye

PROPTOSIS (EXOPHTHALMOS) Clinical Overview Proptosis, exophthalmos or
protrusion of the eyes, is a forward displacement of the eye, which may
be caused by a congenital shallow orbit (craniofacial malformation such
as oxycephaly, Crouzon syndrome), trauma (orbital haemorrhage),
inflammation (orbital cellulitis, abscess), vascular diseases (e.g.
haemangioma, cavernous sinus thrombosis), central nervous system anomaly
(encephalocele), endocrine disorder (e.g. Graves’ disease) and neoplasms
(optic glioma, meningioma, metastatic neuroblastoma). Children with
neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF-1) are at high risk of developing optic
glioma and meningioma. The condition provides a diagnostic dilemma.

Possible Diagnoses Infants

Children

Common Orbital capillary haemangioma Lymphangioma Lacrimal gland
cyst/tumour Orbital teratoma Metastatic neuroblastoma Rare Plexiform
neurofibroma Congenital orbital varices Orbital encephalocele Neonatal
Graves’ disease

Capillary haemangioma Orbital cellulitis Shallow orbit (e.g. Crouzon
syndrome) Tumour (optic nerve glioma, meningioma) Graves’ disease
(thyroid orbitopathy)

Deep dermoid cyst Plexiform neurofibroma Trauma (orbital haemorrhage)
Histiocytosis X Sarcoidosis Lymphangioma Neuroblastoma Non-specific
orbital inflammatory syndrome Fibrous dysplasia Orbital encephalocele
Wegener’s granulomatosis Juvenile xanthogranuloma

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance Acute onset Unilateral Red/tender Lid
retraction Associated headache/diplopia

Capillary Haemangioma

Orbital Cellulitis

Shallow Orbit

Tumour

Graves’ Disease

No Yes No No No

Yes Yes Yes Possible Possible

No No No No No

Possible Yes Possible Possible Possible

No No No Yes Possible

Recommended Investigations \*\* FBC: leukocytosis suggests bacterial
inflammation \*\*\* Thyroid function tests for suspected hyperthyroidism

112

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

*** Tumour markers in urine (vanillylmandelic acid and homovanillic
acid): elevated in neuroblastoma in 95% *   Skull X-ray for cranial
tumour **\* Renal ultrasound scan for metastatic neuroblastoma \*\*\* CT
scan (most useful) for any suspected cranial tumour \*\* Aspiration
cytology and biopsy occasionally required

Top Tips • Orbital capillary haemangioma is the most common orbital
tumour in children, more often affecting the upper lid. Remember that
the tumour has rapid growth during the first 6 months of life and
regresses spontaneously when the child reaches 4–6 years of age. • A
clinician faced with a child with proptosis should be able to undertake
ophthalmic examination, including assessment of visual acuity, ocular
muscle movement, proptosis, pupillary size and reaction to light, fundi
and systemic examination. • Optic gliomas are common with NF-1 (15%);
they are usually benign and asymptomatic and commonly present with
visual disturbance. Unilateral glioma typically presents with afferent
pupillary defect; a light source on the affected eye produces pupil
dilatation (instead of constriction), while the unaffected eye produces
bilateral pupil constriction. • Proptosis caused by Graves’ disease may
occur in older children. Optic neuropathy, corneal problems and
extraocular muscular involvement are far less common in children than in
adults. Lid oedema, lag and retraction are common. • Neuroblastoma, the
most common solid tumour of childhood, metastasises frequently into the
orbit. The tumour may arise from the adrenals, cervical sympathetic
chain or mediastinum.

Red Flags • A proptotic eye not adequately protected by the lids is at
risk of keratopathy, strabismus, diplopia, optic nerve atrophy and
decreased visual acuity. Urgent management is required. • Be aware that
orbital cellulitis, often caused by paranasal sinusitis, first manifests
as a red swelling of the lid. Prompt treatment with IV antibiotics at
this stage dramatically improves the outcome. • Orbital cellulitis must
be recognised and treated promptly before serious complications occur,
including extension of the infection into the cranial cavity causing
meningitis, cavernous sinus thrombosis, and epidural, subdural, or brain
abscess. Admission to hospital is urgently required. • Be aware that a
rapidly progressive swelling may suggest a malignant tumour such as
rhabdomyosarcoma, metastatic neuroblastoma or Ewing’s sarcoma. • In a
child who presents with Horner’s syndrome with or without orbital
ecchymoses, neuroblastoma has to be excluded.

FURTHER READING Chan W, Wong GWK, Fan DSP et al. Ophthalmopathy in
children with Graves’ disease. Br J Ophthalmol 2002;86(7):740–742.

113

Eye

SQUINT (STRABISMUS) Clinical Overview Strabismus – misalignment of the
eyes – is a common ophthalmic problem, affecting 4%–5% of children
younger than 6 years of age (Figure 9.2). It is associated with a
significant negative impact on quality of life. Early detection and
repair prevent visual and psychosocial dysfunction. Strabismus is
diagnosed clinically, which involves examination of the corneal light
reflex and cover test. It may be transient or constant, and manifest or
latent. Because of different causes and treatments, it is important to
divide strabismus into non-paralytic and paralytic. Non-paralytic
strabismus includes inward deviation of the eyes (esophorias, commonly
known as convergent or inward or crossed eyes), outward deviation of the
eyes (known as exophorias, or divergent strabismus) and hyperdeviation
(upward) and hypodeviation (downward) of an eye. Paralytic strabismus
involves palsy of the third, fourth or sixth cranial nerve. Strabismus
may be a congenital (or better termed infantile, as this allows
inclusion of cases of strabismus that develop within the first few
months of life) or an acquired form. One of the most important and
serious causes of the acquired form of strabismus is retinoblastoma.

FIGURE 9.2

Squint.

Possible Diagnoses Infants

Children

Common Pseudo-strabismus Congenital (infantile) Intermittent strabismus
Paralytic strabismus Latent strabismus

Pseudo-strabismus Congenital (infantile) non-paralytic strabismus
Paralytic strabismus Accommodation strabismus Latent strabismus
(Continued)

114

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter Infants

Children

Rare Möbius syndrome Parinaud’s syndrome Duane syndrome Brown’s syndrome

Migraine ophthalmoplegia Möbius syndrome (congenital bilateral facial
weakness) Duane syndrome (congenital impaired eye motility) Parinaud’s
syndrome (congenital weakness in vertical gaze) Brown’s syndrome
(impaired elevation of the eye on adduction)

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance

Normal corneal reflex Present younger than 6 months Easily detectable on
examination Associated diplopia Detectable by cover test

PseudoStrabismus

Congenital Squint

Paralytic Squint

Accommodation Strabismus

Latest Strabismus

Yes Yes Yes

No Yes Possible

Yes Possible Yes

Yes No Possible

Possible Possible Possible

No No

Possible Yes

Yes No

No No

No Yes

Recommended Investigations \*\*\* Corneal light reflex for children who
are not cooperative (under the age of 3 years) \*\*\* Cover test for
children who are cooperative \*\*\* Orbital ultrasonography or CT scan
for paralytic strabismus or retinoblastoma

Top Tips • Pseudo-strabismus, a common cause of referral to an
ophthalmologist, is caused by epicanthic folds or broad flat nasal
bridge. The normal alignment is shown by the normal corneal light
reflexes. • Children with a high risk of developing strabismus, who need
close surveillance, include those with a family history of strabismus,
prematurity, congenital ptosis or cataract. • The conventional method of
eye patching in strabismus is associated with low compliance, social
stigma and stress. New treatments include liquid crystal display
occlusion glasses, and botulinum injections to the extraocular muscle
(the latter method has acceptable safety margins). • An eye deviation
that is present only when binocular vision is interrupted (by occlusion
of one eye) is termed latent, while manifest deviation is present under
binocular viewing of both eyes. • Corneal light reflex is the most rapid
and easily performed test to diagnose strabismus, particularly in
children who are uncooperative. • Patients with accommodation strabismus
(crossed eye) are typically farsighted (hyperopic). • Up to the age of 6
months, intermittent strabismus is a normal developmental milestone,
occurring particularly as outward deviation in about two-thirds of
neonates. After the age of 6 months, it is usually asymptomatic due to a
well-developed suppression mechanism.

Eye

115

Red Flags • Strabismus should never be ignored; it is never outgrown. •
In a child with any ocular disorder, including squints, assessment of
the visual acuity is essential. • Remember that the corneal light reflex
is normal in paralytic strabismus. • Untreated amblyopia (reduced visual
acuity) results in permanent vision impairment. • Be aware that children
with intermittent strabismus may present with excessive rubbing of the
eyes and sensitivity to the sunlight. • Be aware that a fourth cranial
nerve palsy causes a contralateral head tilt, i.e. a head tilt to the
right caused by left-sided palsy, and vice versa. Conversely, a sixth
cranial nerve palsy causes head turning towards the same side of the
palsy. These maneuvers diminish the associated diplopia. •
Retinoblastoma is most curable if diagnosed early; death is inevitable
if untreated. • Retinoblastoma, with an incidence of one in 20,000
births, is the most important cause of acquired strabismus. The tumour
also presents with unilateral or bilateral leukocoria (a white pupil),
orbital inflammation and/or a red eye reflex (cat eye).

FURTHER READING Solebo AL, Austin A, Theodorou M et al. Botulinum toxin
chemodenervation for childhood strabismus in England: National and local
patterns of practice. PLOS ONE 2018;13(6):e0199074.

10

URINARY

BEDWETTING (NOCTURNAL ENURESIS) Clinical Overview Bedwetting (nocturnal
enuresis \[NE\]) may present in isolation (monosymptomatic enuresis
\[MSE\]) or in association with daytime incontinence; urge, hesitancy,
and straining symptoms; postvoid dribbling; or dysfunctional voiding
(non-monosymptomatic enuresis \[NMSE\]). NE is defined as the
involuntary voiding of urine during sleep at least three times a week
for at least 3 months in a child 5 years or older. It is the most common
chronic childhood complaint affecting over half a million children in
the United Kingdom. The incidence of NE at the age of 5 years is about
10%; at the age of 10 years, it is around 5%; and 1%–2% of children
continue with bedwetting after puberty. About 15% of children are
spontaneously cured annually. NE is divided into primary nocturnal
enuresis (PNE) (continue to wet beyond the age of 5 years), affecting
80% of children, and secondary nocturnal enuresis (SNE) (after a
previous dry period greater than 6 months) in 20% of children. Causes of
PNE include genetic (on chromosomes 12 and 13), delayed maturation,
sleep disorders and antidiuretic hormone (ADH) deficiency. Causes of SNE
include urinary tract infection (UTI), emotional stress, type 1 diabetes
(T1D), child abuse, diabetes insipidus (DI), obstructive sleep apnoea
(OSA) and seizure.

Possible Diagnoses Infants

Children

Common PNE (mostly genetic) SNE Compulsive fluid drinking T1D
Developmental delay Rare Renal tubular acidosis/necrosis Sickle-cell
anaemia (SCA) DI Bladder neck obstruction Congestive cardiac failure
Chronic renal failure Nocturnal seizures

116

117

Urinary

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance Positive family history Psychogenic
Associated polydipsia Polyuria Short enuresis history

PNE

SNE

Yes No No No No

Possible Yes No No Possible

Compulsive Drinking No Possible Yes Yes No

T1D Possible No Yes Yes Yes

Developmental Delay No No Possible No No

Recommended Investigations \*\*\* Urinalysis and culture for infection,
and glycosuria (T1D) \*\*\* Blood glucose, acid-base analysis, urea and
electrolytes (U&E), if clinically indicated *** Renal ultrasound scan
in NMSE for anatomy and pre- and postvoid urine residual estimates
*** Consider an overnight EEG or polysomnography if nocturnal seizures
or sleep disorder is suspected

Top Tips • Examination should include the perianal area for excoriation
due to itching (may suggest threadworms), the vulva, lumbosacral and
lower limbs, and the abdomen for distended bladder. • Clear urine
correlates well with absence of bacteria. Dipstick testing suggests UTI,
T1D, renal tubular acidosis (glycosuria without hyperglycaemia) and low
specific ­g ravity in DI. • Reassuring the child (and parents) that
there is strong evidence that he/she will be dry in the future is often
omitted but very helpful; removing any punishment methods at home is
important. • UTI in children with MSE occurs in about 1%. Despite this,
urinalysis is essential at the child’s initial visit. UTI is found in
around 50% in NMSE, and therefore urinalysis is an essential test. •
Functional bladder capacity (FBC) is defined by the following formula:
Age of the child × 30 + 30. Low FBC is frequently associated with NE.
Measuring the FBC (first void in the morning) is important. Increased
water intake and frequent urination during the daytime improve FBC and
NE. • Nocturia, defined as an amount of urine passed at night that
exceeds the FBC, is measured by weighing the bed sheet at night and in
the morning after wetting. Alternatively, signs such as excessive urine
passed (soaking wet), early wetting (in the first 2 hours of sleep),
multiple wetting at night and low specific gravity all suggest nocturia.
• A large proportion of children with NE have nocturia. Treatment with
desmopressin should primarily be offered for children with evidence of
excessive urine output at night.

118

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

Red Flags • Strong association exists between OSA and NE. Adenoid and/or
tonsillar hypertrophy should be excluded. Significant reduction of NE is
achieved with surgical repair of the obstruction. • Remember that
although parents commonly lift a child with NE, this should be
discouraged as it may encourage the child to wet while asleep during the
lifting. • Persistent dysfunctional void may lead to non-neurogenic
neurogenic bladder, which is characterised by failure of the external
sphincter to relax during voiding. Children may end with trabeculated
bladder, hydronephrosis and renal failure. • Bedwetting may be a warning
sign of physical and/or sexual abuse. If physical examination suspects
child abuse, have the child examined by a professional specialised in
child abuse.

FURTHER READING National Institute for Clinical Excellence (NICE).
Nocturnal enuresis: The management of bedwetting in children and young
people. BMJ 2010;341. doi.org/10.1136/bmj.c5399.
https://www.org.uk/guidance/cg111 Sinha R, Raut S. Management of
nocturnal enuresis-myths and facts. World J Nephrol 2016;6(4):328–338.

119

Urinary

BLOOD IN URINE (HAEMATURIA) Clinical Overview Gross haematuria indicates
blood is seen with naked eyes. Microscopic haematuria is more common
(incidence 1%–2% of school-age children) and is defined as &gt;5 RBC/HPF
(red blood cells per high-power field) in the urine sediment of
centrifuged freshly voided urine. In contrast to gross haematuria, the
majority of patients (about 80%) with microhaematuria have no clinically
identifiable cause for the haematuria. The haematuria of glomerular
disease is usually uniformly red, without clots or pain. An exception is
Henoch–Schönlein purpura (HSP), which is associated with abdominal pain.
Causes of painful haematuria include urolithiasis, UTI or renal tumour.
When a child presents with blood in urine, doctors should determine that
it is actually haematuria. Red urine may be due to drugs (e.g.
rifampicin, nitrofurantoin), metabolic causes (e.g. porphyrins,
methaemoglobin), pigments (e.g. haemoglobin, myoglobin) and food (e.g.
beets, blackberries). In these conditions, urinalysis will be negative
for blood.

Possible Diagnoses Infants

Children

Common Asphyxia (hypoxic-ischaemic encephalopathy) Renal vein thrombosis
(cross haematuria) Blood coagulopathy Drugs Infection (sepsis)
Obstructive uropathy Rare Haemorrhagic disease of the newborn (HDN)
Trauma Renal artery/vein thrombosis Cortical and medullary necrosis
Nephrocalcinosis Polycystic kidney disease Nephrocalcinosis Tumour (e.g.
nephroblastoma)

IgA nephropathy Poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis (PSGN) HSP UTI
Coagulopathies (e.g. thrombocytopenia)

Renal stones Vascular (e.g. renal vein thrombosis, SCA) Haemolytic
uraemic syndrome (HUS) Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) Idiopathic
haematuria Tumour (e.g. nephroblastoma, bladder hamartoma) Alport
syndrome Polycystic kidneys Goodpasture syndrome (pulmonary haemorrhage)
Drugs Hypercalciuria Haemorrhagic cystitis (cyclophosphamide)
High-intensity exercise Wegener’s granulomatosis (with polyangiitis)
Nutcracker syndrome (compressed left renal vein) Urethral or bladder
foreign body

120

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance Abdominal pain With proteinuria RBCs
casts Gross haematuria Recurrent

UTI

PSGN

IgA

HSP

Coagulopathy

Possible Possible No Possible Possible

No Yes Yes Yes No

No Yes Yes Yes Yes

Yes Yes Yes Yes No

Possible No No Possible Possible

Recommended Investigations *** Urine: RBCs and proteinuria suggest
renal disease; RBCs casts indicate glomerulonephritis *** 24-hour urine
collection for calcium excretion (abnormal if &gt;4 mg/kg) *** FBC:
anaemia in HUS, haemolytic anaemia, chronic renal disease; leucopenia in
SLE, thrombocytopenia in SLE; reticulocytosis in haemolytic anaemia ***
High antistreptolysin titer (or better streptozyme if available)
suggests PSGN *** U&E: increased creatinine and urea in HUS, chronic
renal failure; calcium to rule out hypercalcaemia **  Complement
levels: low but recover in 6–8 weeks in PSGN; persistent in
proliferative nephritis **   Auto-antibodies (ANF, anti-double-stranded
DNA antibody for immune-mediated nephritis) *** Renal ultrasound scan:
detects hydronephrosis, calculus, tumour and calcification
*** Cystoscopy for bladder source of bleeding, e.g. haemangiomas, or
from a lesion in the ureter *** In tropics search for Schistosoma
haematobium eggs in urine and faeces

Top Tips • Nephrocalcinosis is not uncommon in premature babies and can
be seen in up to 40%. Risk factors include the use of loop diuretics,
metabolic acidosis and renal tubular acidosis. • Isolated microscopic
haematuria is common in healthy children and often transient. Persistent
microscopic haematuria indicates &gt;5 RBC/HPF at monthly intervals. •
Microscopic haematuria is often idiopathic. The most known cause is
hypercalciuria (about 25% of cases) and is confirmed by elevated calcium
excretion of &gt;4 mg/kg in 24-hour urine collection. Hypercalcaemic
hypercalciuria (e.g. hyperparathyroidism) is confirmed by high serum
calcium. • Proteinuria in association with haematuria is very suggestive
of renal origin of the haematuria. Casts, particularly RBCs casts,
indicate a diagnosis of glomerulonephritis. • Gross haematuria in
association with mild oedema, hypertension and high creatinine suggests
nephritic syndrome, while gross oedema and proteinuria suggest nephrotic
syndrome. • IgA nephropathy is the most common cause of recurrent
painless haematuria affecting typically children aged 8–10 years. There
is concurrent URTI and proteinuria. Haematuria subsides soon to be
followed by microscopic haematuria. Diagnosis by biopsy: mesangial
deposits in the glomeruli. • In PSGN, the most common cause of gross
haematuria worldwide, the urine is uniformly red, either brownish-red or
dark brown (cola colour), and usually contains RBCs casts. Significant
abdominal pain is usually absent, except in cases with HSP. • In many
countries, e.g. Egypt, haematuria is mostly due to Schistosoma
haematobium. Diagnosis is made by detection of eggs in urine and faeces,
or biopsy of the bladder, rectum or liver.

Urinary

121

Red Flags • Common presentation of neonatal renal vein and artery
thrombosis is gross haematuria, thrombocytopenia and abdominal mass (in
vein thrombosis). Hypertension occurs with arterial thrombosis, and this
sign should be searched for by repeated blood pressure measurements. •
When a child presents with melaena with or without haematuria, he/she
may have HDN. Diagnosis is supported by the history of exclusively
breastfed child and no vitamin K was given. • Neonatal vaginal discharge
due to maternal hormonal withdrawal is often mistaken for haematuria
particularly when the blood is mixed with urine. Parents should be
reassured. • The presence of red-brown or pink discolouration on the
nappies is often urate crystals. This is a benign condition and improves
rapidly with increased fluid intake. • Haematuria in association with
abdominal pain suggests UTI, HSP, renal stone or tumour. An urgent
urinalysis is required in addition to ultrasound scan. • It is wrong to
make a diagnosis of UTI based on urine RBCs or protein or both; positive
nitrite and white blood cells (WBCs) in the dipstick are more important
indicators in suggesting UTI than these two indices. • Be aware that
although UTI is usually caused by bacterial infection, common
respiratory virus, e.g. adenovirus, can cause haemorrhagic cystitis,
particularly in immunocompromised status. • While adults and older
children with urolithiasis present nearly always with severe flank pain
and haematuria, pre-school children usually present with UTI and a less
severe degree of flank pain. • Gross haematuria following an URTI
suggests IgA nephropathy. Diagnosis is not established by serum
complement or IGA levels but by renal biopsy showing glomerular IgA
immune deposits.

FURTHER READING Joseph C, Gattineni J. Proteinuria and haematuria in the
neonate. Curr Opin Pediatr 2016;28(2):202–208. NICE Guideline: UTI in
children and young people. 2017. http://guidance.nice.org.uk/CG054

122

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

FREQUENT URINATION Clinical Overview The term indicates frequent (more
than seven a day in school-age children) voids of small amounts of
urine, often associated with urgency. In infancy, voiding is
physiologically frequent, as often as 15–20 times a day, occurring by
reflex bladder contraction mediated by sympathetic nerve system (T10–L2)
and parasympathetic nerve system (S2–S4). In older children, bladder
control is achieved through gradual bladder enlargement, leading to an
increase of bladder capacity, cortical inhibition of the reflex bladder
contraction, and the ability to consciously tighten the external
sphincter to prevent incontinence. In paediatrics, the most common cause
of frequent urination is an overactive bladder (OAB), with or without
UTI. OAB is defined as urinary urgency without specific pathogen or
metabolic disease. The condition has to be differentiated from polyuria
(frequent of large amount of urine) and incontinence (involuntary loss
of urine). Female children are more affected than males.

Possible Diagnoses Infants

Children

Common Physiological Nappy dermatitis Fever Diuretics

UTI, mainly lower Vulvovaginitis Overactive bladder (detrusor
instability) Pollakiuria and anxiety (daytime frequent urination)
Developmental delay (including neurogenic bladder)

Rare Drugs (diuretics) Urethritis (e.g. Reiter’s syndrome) Ectopic
ureter and fistula Vaginal voiding Bladder outlet obstruction Urethral
stricture Pregnancy Excessive intake of caffeine Congenital bladder
diverticulum

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance With dysuria Positive nitrite and WBC
Reduced FBC More in girls Fever

Lower UTI

Vulvovaginitis

OAB

Pollakiuria

Developmental Delay

Yes Yes No Yes Possible

Yes Possible No Yes No

Possible Possible Yes Yes No

No No Yes Possible No

Possible No Yes No No

Recommended Investigations \*\*\* Urinalysis with urine culture \*\*\*
Renal ultrasound scan with pre- and postvoid residual urine estimate
\*\*\* Urodynamic study for neurogenic bladder

Urinary

123

Top Tips • Evaluation of the bladder function in older children should
begin with keeping, for at least 3 consecutive days, a voiding diary
that contains data on the hours and volumes of voided urine to establish
the frequency and functional bladder capacity. • Pollakiuria (from the
Greek word pollakis meaning ‘many times’) or daytime frequency syndrome
of childhood, often occurs as a result of stress-related problems,
including anxiety, but without dysuria or systemic disease. There is
sudden onset of frequent voiding every 5–10 minutes, in a previously
toilet-trained child. It often disappears suddenly in 2–3 months.
Typical age of occurrence is 4–6 years. • Hypercalciuria may be a sign
of overactive bladder. • Dysfunction voiding is a common cause of
frequent urination. It is characterised by a void of a smaller than
normal amount of urine or a bladder that contracts against a closed
sphincter. • Children with delayed attainment of bladder control and
daytime incontinence have increased risk of incontinence in adolescence.

Red Flags • In the differential diagnosis of frequent urination, the
most important aspect is to exclude polyuria. Arrange a urine collection
over 12 or 24 hours to establish the diagnosis if necessary. • Ensure
that the frequent voiding is not continuous incontinence; if so this
suggests in boys posterior urethral valve obstruction and in girls
ectopic ureter. • Ectopic ureter usually occurs in girls in association
with a duplicate collecting system that can be diagnosed by ultrasound
scan. Dribbling incontinence is characteristic and should not be missed.
• When physical examination and urinalysis are normal, hypercalciuria
with or without urolithiasis is often the cause. A 24-hour urine
collection for calcium is diagnostic. • Vaginal void may occur because
of ectopic ureter into the vagina. Labial adhesions are a common cause
of continuous urinary incontinence and frequency. Typically, a girl with
labial adhesions urinates after she stands up. • There is a strong link
between child abuse (sexual, emotional and physical) and urological
symptoms, even years after the abuse has occurred. This link should be
kept in mind when a child presents with urinary frequency and urgency
symptoms.

FURTHER READING Heron J, Grzeda M, von Gontard A et al. Trajectories of
urinary incontinence in childhood bladder and bowel symptoms in
adolescence: Prospective cohort study. BMJ Open 2017;7(3):e014238. NICE
Guideline: UTI in children and young people. 2017.
http://guidance.nice.org.uk/CG054

124

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

INCONTINENCE (DAYTIME OR DIURNAL WETTING) Clinical Overview Urinary
incontinence (UI) is a common problem presenting at primary care
services, often associated with frequent urination, urge symptoms and
NE. It indicates involuntary loss of urine during the daytime (diurnal)
after the age of 5 years. It can be primary (child has been persistently
incontinent) or secondary if the child achieved complete dryness for a
period greater than 6 months. Primary incontinence is usually
intermittent with variable periods of continence intervals. On rare
occasions it has an organic cause: congenital malformation of the
ureter, neurogenic bladder that includes congenital spina bifida and
sacral agenesis and acquired inflammatory or neoplastic diseases of the
nervous system. Secondary incontinence is usually associated with a
stressful event, constipation, T1D, and child abuse. The main causes of
UI are an overactive bladder leading to urinary urge and holding urine
until the last minute by suppressing the need to void, until
incontinence happens. Around 20%–40% of children with UI have
behavioural problems including attention deficit hyperactivity disorder,
anxiety and antisocial behaviour.

Possible Diagnoses Infants

Children

Common Physiological (before 5 years) Congenital malformation (e.g.
urethra, ureter) Meningomyelocele Labial adhesions

Unstable bladder (overactive bladder) Lower UTI Neurogenic bladder
Giggle incontinence

Rare Chronic renal failure Bladder outlet obstruction (e.g. posterior
urethral obstruction) Ectopic ureter (in girls) Sacral agenesis Vulvar
lichen sclerosis Vaginal reflux of urine Balanitis xerotica obliterans
Hinman syndrome Lipomeningocele DI Tethered spinal cord

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance

Episodic Frequent urination Mainly in girls Positive nitrite and WBC
Examination confirms diagnosis

Unstable Bladder

Lower UTI

Neurogenic Bladder

No Yes No Possible No

No Yes Possible Yes No

Possible Possible No Possible Yes

Giggle Incontinence Yes No Yes No No

Labial Adhesions No Yes Yes Possible Yes

Urinary

125

Recommended Investigations *** Urinalysis: positive nitrate and
leukocytes suggest UTI, culture will confirm the infection; specific
gravity of urine &gt;1.005 excludes DI; 24-hour urine collection needed
to exclude hypercalciuria *** Renal ultrasound scan, with pre- and
postvoid residual urine estimates \*\* Urodynamics and lumbosacral
evaluation mainly for cases of neurogenic bladder \*\*\* Spine MRI if
tethered cord is suspected.

Top Tips • Diurnal enuresis, or daytime wetting, is involuntary voiding
of urine during waking hours. It occurs in 10% of children aged 4–6
years and in 2% of adults. • Labial fusion is common, affecting about 3%
of prepubertal girls. The labia minora fuse, usually distally, allowing
a tiny opening proximally. The pocket behind the fused labia acts as a
reservoir from which urine is leaking when the girl is standing or
playing. • Hinman’s syndrome is a non-neurogenic (spine is normal)
voiding dysfunction caused by uncoordinated activity of the detrusor
muscle, bladder neck and external sphincter, often leading subsequently
to increased intra-vesical pressure and kidney damage. • In vaginal
reflux, girls, particularly obese, who do not open their labia wide
enough when voiding, urine may reflux into the vagina, then leak down
and wet the knickers as they stand up. • In boys, posterior urethral
valve is the most common cause of UI. • A girl who voids normally but is
incontinent day and night should be considered to have an ectopic ureter
with duplex kidney until proven otherwise. While an ectopic ureter in
girls usually terminates within the distal third of the vaginal
introitus, in boys it usually terminates within the bladder neck or
posterior urethra. Therefore boys do not suffer from incontinence caused
by ectopic ureter. • Successful management of incontinence includes
dietary means (eliminating caffeine and orange juice), improving bladder
capacity by drinking extra water during the daytime, treating
constipation and instructing the child to void regularly every 2–3
hours. Anticholinergic drugs are very helpful.

Red Flags • Remember to ask the radiologist at the request form for
renal ultrasound to measure the bladder wall thickness: if greater than
5 mm, it indicates a bladder outlet obstruction such as
bladder-sphincter dyssynergia in girls and posterior valve in boys. •
Giggle incontinence occurs in about 5%–10% of girls. The bladder empties
completely during laughter or giggling; it can be very embarrassing in
public. Urgent management is needed. • Daytime incontinence is
frequently caused or complicated by UTI. Ensure that the urine sample is
examined for UTI each time the child attends the clinic. • When a girl
presents with a history of never gaining urinary control and underwear
is always wet, she probably has ectopic bladder. Confirm the diagnosis
by drying the vaginal introitus and inspect the area every 15 minutes.
Re-accumulation of urine is diagnostic. • Treatment of a child with
night and daytime wetting should focus on the daytime problem first.
When daytime wetting responds to the treatment, nighttime wetting will
improve, not vice versa.

FURTHER READING Bernard-Bonnin AC. Diurnal enuresis in childhood. Can
Fam Physician 2000;46:1109–1115.

126

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

PAINFUL URINATION (DYSURIA) Clinical Overview Painful or burning
urination during or immediately after urination, termed dysuria, is
often accompanied by other urinary symptoms such as frequency, urgency
or hesitancy. Although this can sometimes be a sign of UTI, it is more
commonly caused by vulvovaginitis, balanitis or urethritis. The majority
of causes of dysuria are self-limiting and identified by physical
examination with urine or discharge cultures. Children sometimes express
itching as dysuria, and this is commonly seen with worm infestation.
Children who have persistent dysuria with a normal examination and
negative cultures are likely to have either dysfunctional void or
hypercalciuria.

Possible Diagnoses Infants

Children

Common Nappy rash (diaper dermatitis) Meatal stenosis/ulceration Atopic
dermatitis Balanitis Chemical irritation

UTI, mainly lower UTI Vulvovaginitis Balanitis Urethritis/cystitis
Sexually transmitted diseases (STDs)

Rare Herpes simplex infection (peri-urethral) Varicella (peri-urethral
lesions)

Reiter’s syndrome (urethritis, arthritis, red eyes) Sexual abuse Drugs
Hypercalciuria (dysuria with haematuria) Herpes simplex infection Labial
adhesions Pinworms Lichen planus/sclerosis Stevens-Johnson syndrome
Urethral foreign body

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance Most common cause Positive urine
culture Fever Bacterial infection Discharge

UTI

Vulvovaginitis

Balanitis

STD

Urethritis/Cystitis

Yes Yes Possible Yes No

Yes Possible No Possible Possible

No No No Possible Possible

No Possible No Yes Yes

No Possible No Possible Possible

Recommended Investigations *** *** *** ***

Urinalysis is essential for UTI, including culture to confirm UTI
Culture of any discharge in girls with vulvovaginitis to exclude
infection or STD Larvae or ova of pinworms from discharge of
vulvovaginitis Abdominal ultrasound scan for cases with UTI, according
to NICE guidelines

Urinary

127

Top Tips • In children with dysuria, history and examination will
determine whether any test is necessary. • Nappy dermatitis is the most
common cause of dysuria in infancy. This is expressed as crying or
discomfort during urination. • Meatal stenosis – abnormal narrowing of
the urethral opening (meatus) – may be congenital or acquired, e.g.
after circumcision. The condition is characterised by upward, deflected
urine, dysuria, urgency, and frequency and prolonged urination. • Vulvar
lichen sclerosis is a chronic dermatosis of unknown aetiology
(autoimmune) characterised by white patches or plagues affecting the
vulva and anus, and causing irritation, dysuria and UI. In males it is
known as balanitis xerotica obliterans. • Urine dipstick testing is very
helpful in suggesting or excluding UTI: the presence of positive nitrite
with WBC is suggestive but when both are negative UTI is very unlikely.
• In patients with normal examination and negative cultures, dysuria
(often associated with microscopic haematuria) can be caused by
hypercalciuria. A 24-hour urine collection is indicated.

Red Flags • A child with meatal stenosis (congenial or acquired)
requires urgent attention to avoid potential chronic incomplete bladder
emptying with subsequent UTI and kidney damage. • A child with
vulvovaginitis should undergo a careful history to exclude sexual abuse.
• Remember that a foreign body, such as a piece of toilet paper, can be
trapped in the vagina and cause discharge and dysuria. Careful area
inspection is essential. • Beware that pruritis can be expressed as
dysuria; pinworms, which normally infest the perianal area, may
occasionally spread to the vagina. • In a female patient with dysuria
and abdominal pain, pelvic inflammatory disease (PID) must be ruled out.
Asymptomatic infections with either Neisseria gonorrhoeae or Chlamydia
trachomatis may lead to the development of PID, which has serious
consequences if left untreated. • A urethral or vaginal discharge in an
adolescent is likely caused by an infection with either N. gonorrhoeae
or C. trachomatis. • Painful micturition is a serious problem for it may
cause urine retention with subsequent dilation of the urinary tract
system. When herpes simplex causes urethritis, vesicles may be tiny and
inapparent; a thorough examination can clench the diagnosis. • Beware
that in older children self-exploratory sexual play and masturbation can
cause balanitis or vulvovaginitis, even if the history is negative.

FURTHER READING NICE Guideline: UTI in children and young people. 2017.
http://guidance.nice.org.uk/CG054

128

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

POLYURIA (EXCESSIVE URINATION) Clinical Overview Kidney has a key role
in the body water balance: an increase in plasma osmolality (even less
than 1%) or decrease in blood volume stimulates osmo-receptors in the
hypothalamus, leading to secretion of the ADH arginine vasopressin (AVP)
from the pituitary gland. AVP binds to the type 2 vasopressin (VAP)
receptor on the distal tubules and collecting system to increase water
re-absorption through the cyclic AMP-mediated pathway. Polyuria is
defined as urine output &gt;2 L/m2/24 h resulting from either water or
solute diuresis. The most common cause of polyuria is T1D, which is an
autoimmune polygenic disease. DI arises if there is no production or
release of ADH or the kidney is unresponsive to the ADH due to mutated
VAP receptor. Other causes include failure of renal tubular
concentration ability (e.g. SCA) and excessive drinking (compulsive
drinking). Polyuria must be differentiated from the more common
complaint of frequency of a small volume of urine. Accurate measurement
of 24-hour intake of fluids and quantity of urine excretion should be
performed to establish diagnosis of polyuria. Children with polyuria may
present with polydipsia, failure to thrive, dehydration, elevated body
temperature (hyperthermia), seizure due to hypernatraemic dehydration
and NE.

Possible Diagnoses Infants

Children

Common Post-asphyxia Congenital nephrogenic diabetes insipidus (NDI)
Neonatal diabetes Barter’s syndrome Hypercalcaemia

T1D Psychogenic polydipsia (compulsive fluid drinking) Renal tubular
acidosis DI, cranial Metabolic polyuria (potassium deficiency,
hypercalcaemia)

Rare Congenital and acquired NDI SCA Hypercalcaemia Polycystic kidney
disease Chronic renal failure Drugs (diuretics, lithium,
chlortetracycline) Drugs affecting renal tubule Renal tubular acidosis
(e.g. Fanconi’s syndrome) Pituitary tumours (craniopharyngioma,
histiocytosis X) Barter’s syndrome Post-renal transplant Cystic
fibrosis–associated diabetes

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance

Weight loss Short history Glycosuria Acidosis Hyperglycaemia

T1D

Compulsive

Renal Tubular Acidosis

Cranial DI

Metabolic Polyuria

Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes

No No No No No

Yes No Yes Yes No

Possible Possible No No No

Possible Possible No Possible No

129

Urinary

Recommended Investigations *** *** *** *** ** *** *** ** *** ***

Urinalysis will confirm glycosuria and ketones in DM; specific gravity:
low in DI Blood glucose (BG), to confirm T1D; acid balance and ketones
to confirm DKA HbA1c on admission and three monthly for T1D Osmolality
of serum and urine; urine-specific gravity FBC: anaemia is usually
present in chronic renal failure and SCA U&E, high creatinine in chronic
renal failure; high Na in polyuria Serum calcium: high in hypercalcaemia
ADH serum level estimation in DI: low in cranial DI and normal in NDI
Cranial MRI for the central causes of DI such as craniopharyngioma Water
deprivation test to differentiate between central and NDI

Top Tips • Although the history and physical examination provide clues
to the majority of causes of polyuria, the definite diagnosis is
established from biochemical results: blood glucose, osmolality of the
urine and serum and U&E. • It is essential to determine whether the
child has frequent, small urination or polyuria (large urine). Mothers
are good historians. Observing the child’s urination helps to establish
a diagnosis. • Of all polyuria causes, the most common and important is
T1D presenting with characteristic symptoms of polyuria, polydipsia,
weight loss and high BG (HbA1c ≥ 6.5% or fasting BG: 7.0 mmol = 126
mg/dL). The goals of treatment are near normalisation of glucose
metabolism (HbA1c &lt; 7.5% = 58.5 mmol), and prevention of acute
(hypoglycaemia, ketoacidosis) and long-term complications (retinopathy,
neuropathy, nephropathy, high lipids). • Children with compulsive
drinking are easily diagnosed by the long history, absence of weight
loss and failure to thrive. Low serum osmolality (&lt;280 mosm/kg) and
urine-specific gravity &lt;1.005 establishes the diagnosis. A specific
gravity greater than 1.005 excludes DI. • Compulsive thirst needs to be
differentiated from DI (defined as &gt;50 mL/kg body weight/24 h) that
has high serum osmolality and low urine osmolality &lt;300 mosm. • The
fourth most important cause of polyuria is renal tubular acidosis.
Children may present with dehydration, failure to thrive, anorexia and
vomiting. Diagnosis is by finding glycosuria, low serum bicarbonate and
potassium and hyperchloraemia.

Red Flags • Polyuria due to hypercalcaemia or NDI may pass unnoticed and
the infant may present in the first few weeks of life with irritability,
poor feeding, weight loss, fever and seizure. These can have potentially
devastating consequences (e.g. brain damage) if left undiagnosed and
untreated. • Be aware that although NDI occurs virtually only in boys,
the female carrier may present with infant polyuria due to impaired
urine concentration ability. • Long-standing polyuria may cause enlarged
bladder, mega-ureter and hydronephrosis. • The water deprivation test is
performed to differentiate cranial DI from NDI. The risk of severe
dehydration and hypovolaemia is real; therefore, strict control is
required.

FURTHER READING Simmons KM, Michels AW. Type 1 diabetes: A predicable
disease. World J Diabetes 2015;6(3):380–390.

130

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

URINE RETENTION AND FAILURE TO PASS URINE Clinical Overview Retention of
urine is a frequent presentation in adults (mainly due to benign
prostatic hypertrophy) but is relatively infrequent in children. It is
defined as inability to void for &gt;12 hours, palpable distended
bladder on physical examination or greater than expected volume in
bladder in a child without previously known neurological abnormalities,
voiding dysfunction, immobility or recent surgery. Healthy neonates are
expected to pass urine within 48 hours of life; failure to void after 48
hours is abnormal and requires careful examination and investigation.
Neurological control of the bladder consists of a storage phase
(stimulated by T10–L2) with sympathetic relaxation of the detrusor
muscle and contraction of the urethral sphincter, and a voiding phase
where parasympathetic stimulation facilitates detrusor muscle
contraction and urethral sphincter relaxation (stimulated by S2–S4).

Possible Diagnoses Infants

Children

Common Shock Urethral valve obstruction Asphyxia Dehydration Neurogenic
bladder Acute renal failure Acute tubular necrosis Urethral stricture
Rare Imperforate hymen Acute genital herpes Congestive cardiac failure
Bilateral renal agenesis Bilateral renal vein thrombosis

Neurological abnormalities Dysfunctional voiding (DV) UTI Constipation
Drugs (anticholinergic, antidepressants)

Imperforate hymen Local inflammatory (balanitis, labial fusion) Urethral
calculus Foreign body inserted into the urethra Bladder neck obstruction

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance Neurological

Dysfunctional Void

UTI

Constipation

Drugs

No No No No Yes

Possible Possible No No No

Yes Possible Possible No No

Possible Possible No Possible Yes

No Possible Possible Possible No

Abnormal urinalysis Dysuria Fever Complete retention Examination
establishes the cause

Recommended Investigations \*\*\* Urine dipstick: haematuria suggests
urinary calculus or bladder tumour \*\*\* U&E: high creatinine suggests
renal failure \*\*\* Renal ultrasound scan for any structural
abnormalities, dilated urethra, bladder and ureter

Urinary

131

Top Tips • A normal neonate has 6–44 mL of urine in the bladder at
birth. About 90% of newborns pass urine within 24 hours; the remaining
pass urine within 48 hours. • DV applies to children who habitually
contract the urethral sphincter during voiding. DV is associated with
constipation, painful local irritation (e.g. vulvitis, balanitis), fear
of unclean toilet and urge symptom of urination with attempt to avoid
voiding. • It is important to differentiate between anuria and
retention. In the latter the bladder is usually full, but it is empty
with anuria. History, radiology and U&E differentiate between these
conditions. • Labial fusion (or adhesions) is a common condition (up to
3% of prepubertal girls have it) of urinary retention; topical oestrogen
is indicated. Surgical intervention may be required.

Red Flags • DV results in bladder outflow obstruction and urine
retention, leading to a spectrum of presentations from recurrent lower
UTI to significant upper tract pathology and renal failure. Treating the
cause of the DV is essential. • All cases of urethral valve obstruction
require admission for evaluation and management. Catheterisation of the
bladder should not be attempted before you contact a renal unit as this
procedure may destroy the valve and a diagnosis can be missed. •
Anticholinergic drugs used to stabilise the bladder for diurnal
incontinence may cause retention, dry mouth and constipation. Parents
should be warned about these possible side effects. • A chronically
distended bladder should not be fully drained by catheterization; sudden
decompression can cause haematuria and other renal complications.
Haematuria can cause clots in the urethra leading to urine retention and
bladder distension.

FURTHER READING Clothier J, Wright AJ. Dysfunctional voiding: The
importance of non-invasive urodynamics in diagnosis and treatment.
Pediatr Nephrol 2018;33(3):381–394.

11

GENITAL

GROIN SWELLING AND PAIN Clinical Overview Swelling of the groin in
infants and young children is common and usually noticed by the mother
while giving the child a bath. Lymphadenopathy and inguinal hernia (IH)
are the two most common causes. An important finding in this area is
spermatic cord hydrocele, which is a fluid collection along the
spermatic cord; it results from abnormal closure of the processus
vaginalis and is separated from the testis and epididymis. It has two
types: an encysted hydrocele, which does not communicate with the
peritoneum, and a communicating hydrocele, where the fluid collection
communicates with the peritoneum. Lymphadenopathy is mostly caused by
local inflammation such as nappy rash. Groin pain often accompanies
groin swelling, is caused by a tear or rupture to any adductor thigh
muscles following trauma, and produces sudden sharp pain in the thigh.
Other causes of groin pain include transient synovitis (irritable hip),
hip avascular necrosis (Perthes’ disease) and hip arthritis.

Possible Diagnoses Infants

Children

Common IH Lymphadenopathy (from nappy rash) Hydrocele of spermatic cord
Undescended testis Testicular feminisation

IH Infectious lymphadenopathy Hydrocele of spermatic cord Undescended
testis (true undescended) Femoral hernia

Rare Cancerous lymphadenopathy Testicular feminisation Lymphangioma
Epididymal/epidermoid cyst Lymphatic malignancy

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance

Pain/tender Bilateral Reducible Palpable testis Transillumination

132

IH

Lymphadenitis

Hydrocele Spermatic Cord

Undescended Testis

Femoral Hernia

No Possible Yes Yes Yes

Yes Possible No Yes No

No No No Yes Yes

No Possible No No No

No No Yes Yes Yes

Genital

133

Recommended Investigations Diagnosis of groin swelling is clinical and
investigations are usually not required. ** Full blood count and
C-reactive protein are often required in case of lymphadenitis
** Ultrasound scan is useful in differentiating solid mass (lymph node
from hydrocele, hernia) \*\* Further tests (such as biopsy) may be
required if the lymphadenopathy suggests malignancy

Top Tips • Children with cystic fibrosis, undescended testes, connective
tissue diseases, contralateral hernia, and prematurity (up to 30% of
very low birth infants) have a very high incidence of IH. •
Transillumination demonstrates the presence of fluid: if light shines
through, the swelling is cystic; if not, the mass is solid. • It is
important to differentiate between true undescended and retractile
(yo-yo) testis. In the retractile testis the scrotum is well developed
(while it is hypoplastic in true undescended testis) and the testis can
be manipulated down into the normal scrotal position. • IH is almost
always symptomatic, and the only cure is surgery. However, recurrences
requiring re-operation occur in 10%–15%, and long-term chronic pain in
10%–12%. • Remember that although a child has around 600 lymph nodes,
only the minority of them can be palpated mainly in the neck,
submandibular, axillary and inguinal regions. Generalised
lymphadenopathy indicates the involvement of at least two of these
sites. • Following a repair of IH, a contralateral hernia develops in
about 30%–40%. The risk rises to 50% if the repair of unilateral hernia
is performed within the first year of life. • A child (often aged 5–6
years) with limping and hip pain is likely to have an irritable hip,
which is one of the most frequent causes of hip pain. This condition
should be differentiated from septic arthritis.

Red Flags • In adults, it is a common practise to insert the index
finger into the inguinal canal to feel for an impulse while the patient
is asked to strain or cough. Do not do that in children: the procedure
is painful and rarely yields any useful information. • Unlike umbilical
hernias, IH in children are potentially serious. They require repair as
soon as possible. Referral to surgeons is urgent if the child is younger
than 6 months of age. • Risk factors for hernia incarceration include
female gender, femoral hernia, and groin hernia. • An IH that cannot be
reduced by manipulation (this occurs in only 5%–10%) is often due to
narrow processus vaginalis and not necessarily due to incarceration.
This latter complication is associated with marked tenderness, a firm
mass and a child who inconsolably cries. • IH in girls is far less
common than in boys. A lump in the inguinal area may contain an ovary
or, rarely, a testicle. The latter suggests testicular feminisation,
which is confirmed by chromosomal analysis showing 46 XY. There is a
high incidence of later malignancy in the gonads; it is therefore
routine practice to remove them once the diagnosis is established. •
Beware that stony hard lymph nodes usually suggest malignancy, and may
be metastatic.

FURTHER READING HerniaSurge Group. International guidelines for groin
hernia. Hernia 2018;22(1):1–165.

134

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

PENILE SWELLING Clinical Overview Penile anomalies are common in
children, causing concern for their parents. When a child presents with
a penile problem, the paediatrician has to decide whether the condition
is benign, and so parents can be reassured, or whether a prompt referral
to a surgeon is needed. Swelling of the penis, often with inflammation
and pain, may occur in association with nappy rash or forceful attempt
to retract the foreskin. Balanitis (inflammation of the glans) and
posthitis (inflammation of the prepuce) are usually caused by
Gram-positive organisms such as Staphylococcus. Priapism, a persistent
unwanted erection unrelated to sexual stimulation, is a relatively
frequent complication in children with haematological disorders (e.g.
sickle-cell anaemia \[SCA\], G-6-P-D deficiency), medications or trauma.
The oedema of nephrotic syndrome (NS) or Henoch–Schönlein purpura (HSP)
accumulates in dependent sites and often causes penile swelling.
Practically all cases of penile swelling need immediate medical
attention.

Possible Diagnoses Infants

Children

Common Trauma (birth injury, e.g. breach delivery) Balanitis Congenital
adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) Associated with nappy rash Penile oedema
(idiopathic, generalised oedema) Rare Congenital NS Paraphimosis
Congenital lymphoedema

Balanitis Trauma Paraphimosis Priapism (e.g. in sickle cell anaemia
\[SCA\]) Penile oedema (e.g. nephrotic syndrome \[NS\])

Drugs (cocaine, serotonin reuptake inhibitors) Penile torsion
Para-urethral cyst Congenital or post-infectious lymphoedema Tumour
(including carcinoma) Megalo-urethra Epidermal inclusion cyst

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance Inflammatory changes/redness
Pain/tenderness Associated systemic signs Engorgement of glans only
History of recurrence

Balanitis

Trauma

Paraphimosis

Priapism

Penile Oedema

Yes Yes No Possible Possible

Possible Yes Possible No No

No Yes No Yes Possible

No Yes Yes No Possible

No No Possible No No

Recommended Investigations \*\*\* Urine to confirm proteinuria in case
of NS \*\*\* Hormonal investigation to exclude CAH, such as plasma
17-hydroxyprogesterone

Genital

135

*** Haemoglobin (Hb), Hb-electrophoresis and peripheral blood film for
any non-traumatic priapism *** Plasma albumin, cholesterol and
triglycerides for cases of NS \*\*\* Gram-stained smear and culture in
case of urethral discharge

Top Tips • The foreskin is normally non-retractile and attached to the
glans in neonates. It becomes retractile in about 40% of children aged 1
year, in 90% aged 4 years and in 99% aged 15 years. • Balanitis, the
most common cause of penile inflammation, may result from allergy,
seborrhoeic dermatitis, insect bites or from any erosion of the skin
allowing bacteria (usually staphylococci) to invade. Sexually
transmitted disease (STD) should be considered in sexually active
adolescents. • Priapism is usually ischaemic, which is rigid and tender.
Non-tender priapism is non-ischaemic. • Priapism in SCA results from
pooling of blood in the corpora cavernosa, causing obstruction to the
venous outflow. It usually lasts more than 4 hours. • A rare condition
of penile swelling is penile torsion, usually anti-clockwise rotation of
the penis. • Although SCA is the most common cause of priapism, penile
neoplasms, leukaemia (particularly chronic granulocytic leukaemia),
cocaine abuse and scorpion bite are other rarer causes. • Penile
manifestations of HSP (also termed immunoglobulin A vasculitis) include
penile swelling, priapism, purpuric lesions of the penis and penile
thrombosis. • Immediate management of children with priapism includes
ice packs, bed rest, emptying the bladder, oral or IV hydration and
analgesics. Morphine may be required.

Red Flags • Attempts to forcefully retract the foreskin (e.g. for
cleansing) are dangerous; this can lead to balanitis or paraphimosis. •
An enlarged penis at birth may be the only clinical manifestation of CAH
as some degrees of masculinisation are almost always present at birth.
In girls, enlargement of the clitoris and labial fusion dominate the
clinical features of CAH at birth. • Be aware that cases of paraphimosis
(a retracted foreskin behind the corona glandis that cannot be returned)
require immediate attention if ischaemia of the glans is to be
prevented. Firm manual compression, with eutectic mixture of local
anaesthetics cream and gauze, will usually reduce the constriction. •
Parents of children with SCA should be told to seek medical assistance
if their child develops priapism. They should seek immediate medical
assistance to prevent ischaemia, erectile dysfunction and impotence in
the future. • Be aware that penile swelling may be the initial sign of
NS; check protein in the urine. • Genital injury in boys caused by
physical or sexual abuse is often unrecognised. Any unexplained penile
burn, bruising, incised wound and laceration should raise suspicions of
child abuse.

FURTHER READING Hobbs CJ, Osman T. Genital injuries in boys and abuse.
Arch Dis Child 2007;92(4):328–331. Levey HR, Segal RL, Bivalacqua TJ.
Management of priapism: An update for clinicians. Ther Adv Urol
2014;6(8):230–244.

136

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

PRECOCIOUS PUBERTY Clinical Overview Normal sexual development begins in
girls with breast development, followed by the appearance of pubic hair
(sometimes simultaneously with breast development), axillary hair, onset
of menstruation, acne and adult body odour. In boys, it begins with
testicular enlargement followed by enlargement of the penis, the
appearance of pubic hair, deepening of the voice, acne and adult body
odour. Precocious puberty (PP) is defined as puberty occurring at an
unusual age, i.e. before the age of 8 years in girls or before 9 years
in boys. Puberty nowadays starts earlier than in previous generations.
Puberty depends on increased production of kisspeptin in the
hypothalamus, resulting in increased gonadotropin-releasing hormone
(GnRH), which acts on the pituitary gland to release gonadotropins
luteinising hormone (LH) and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), which
stimulate sex hormone production by the gonads. The causes of PP are
best divided into gonadotropin-dependent central (idiopathic or with
identifiable causes), gonadotropin-independent (adrenal and gonadal
causes), or partial PP (thelarche, adrenarche, menarche). In more than
90% of girls and 50% of boys, the cause of PP is idiopathic, i.e. no
identifiable cause. The main differentiating feature between central
(hypothalamic) and adrenal causes is that the PP is always isosexual in
the former and testes remain small in the latter cause.

Possible Diagnoses Infants

Children

Common Central nervous system injury Adrenal (e.g. congenital adrenal)
Ovarian (e.g. McCune–Albright) Iatrogenic (external sex hormones) PPP
(e.g. premature thelarche)

Partial (incomplete) precocious puberty (PPP) Central idiopathic
precocious puberty Central with identifiable causes (e.g. hypothalamic
hamartoma) Gonads (ovarian cysts, McCune–Albright syndrome) Adrenal
(e.g. congenital adrenal hyperplasia, tumour)

Rare Iatrogenic (external sources of sex hormones) Irradiation of the
brain Familial PP in males Teratoma (e.g. in the mediastinum)

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance

Normal growth Gonadotropin dependent More in girls than in boys Advanced
bone age High FSH + LH

PPP

Idiopathic Central PP

Central PP with a Cause

GonadCausing PP

Adrenal Causing PP

Yes No Yes No No

No Yes Yes Yes Yes

No Yes No Yes Yes

No No No Yes No

No No No Yes No

Genital

137

Recommended Investigations \*\*\* Hormonal assay of GnRH, LH, FSH \*\*\*
GnRH stimulation test (in central PP, the LH and FSH levels are
increased) ***  Serum level of I7-hydroxyprogesterone,
dehydroepiandrosterone, cortisol and aldosterone in cases of CAH ***
Wrist X-ray to assess bone maturation \*\*\* Pelvic ultrasound scan and
adrenal visualisation for CAH \*\*\* Cranial magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) for cases of suspected central PP \*\*   Skeletal survey for bony
fibrous dysplasia for a child with PP and hyperpigmented spots

Top Tips • Puberty can easily be assessed by bone age: if bone age is
within 1 year of chronological age, puberty either has not started or
has just started; bone age within 2 years indicates the child is in
puberty. • Isolated thelarche is characterised by normal growth,
age-appropriate skeletal maturation, pre-pubertal uterus and ovaries and
isolated FSH elevation with pre-pubertal LH level. • PPP is either an
isolated breast development (precocious thelarche) or sexual hair
appearance (precocious adrenarche) without other signs of puberty
occurring before the age of 8 years in girls and 9 years in boys. PPP is
usually benign and non-progressive. Onset younger than 3 years is
frequently associated with regression over 1–3 years; later onset
usually progresses slowly as PP. • In precocious thelarche, the nipple
is characteristically pale, immature, thin and ­transparent. In PP the
nipple is mature and prominent with a dark areola indicating high
circulating oestrogen. • PP may have adverse effects on social behaviour
and psychological development. An early growth spurt causes rapid bone
maturation, resulting in early epiphyseal fusion and short stature. •
Low-dose radiation of the brain may induce PP in girls; high-dose
radiation may induce PP in both sexes. • Hypothyroidism can cause PP;
children are, however, short and the growth velocity is decreased. •
Growth acceleration and advanced bone age (wrist X-ray) favour true PP
against PPP.

Red Flags • In any child with PP, careful search of the skin is
essential: café-au-lait maculae with smooth borders suggest NF-1; larger
café-au-lait patches with irregular outlines are consistent with
McCune–Albright syndrome (polyostotic fibrous dysplasia of bone and
ovarian cysts). • Be aware that children with hypothalamic lesion may
present with diabetes insipidus (polydipsia, polyuria), hyperthermia,
obesity or loss of weight, or inappropriate crying or laughter. • PP may
put girls at risk of sexual abuse and psychological trauma from teasing
and bullying.

138

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

• A child with precocious thelarche or adrenarche still needs careful
evaluation, as these cannot often be easily and definitively
differentiated from true PP. • Full investigation, including imaging of
the central nervous system and abdomen, should be carried out for all
children with PP who have progressive signs of puberty, are younger than
8 years, with neurological signs or if the diagnosis is uncertain. •
Hypothalamic hamartoma (ectopic tissue secreting pulse GnRH) is the most
common identifiable lesion causing PP. Examination of visual acuity,
visual fields and eye fundi is essential.

FURTHER READING Bajpal A, Menon PSN. Contemporary issues in precocious
puberty. Indian Endocrinol Metabol 2011;15(Suppl 3):S172–S179. Stephen
MD, Zage PE, Waguespack SG. Gonadotropin-dependent precocious puberty:
Neoplastic causes. Int J Pediatr Endocrinol 2011;2011(1):184502.

139

Genital

RECTAL PROLAPSE Clinical Overview Rectal prolapse (RP) refers to a
herniation of the rectal mucosa through the anus. When the protrusion
includes the rectal wall, it is termed procidentia. The mucosal type is
the most common and least serious form of RP in children. Most cases of
RP occur during the first few years of life, with a peak age of 1.5–6
years; it is rare in older children. It is usually noted after
defaecation and is reduced either spontaneously or by the child’s finger
or parents. It rarely becomes chronic; if it does, complications such as
ulceration, bleeding and inflammation (proctitis) are likely
consequences. Most causes of RP are due to raised intra-abdominal
pressure during chronic constipation, diarrhoea or cough. One of the
most important causes of RP is cystic fibrosis (CF), and RP may be the
first manifestation of the disease.

Possible Diagnoses Infants

Children

Common CF Chronic diarrhoea (coeliac, infectious enteritis) Malnutrition
Idiopathic Parasitic infection Rare Connective tissue disorders (CTDs)
Chronic cough Repair of imperforate anus Meningomyelocele

Idiopathic CF Chronic constipation Chronic diarrhoea (e.g. ulcerative
colitis) Connective tissue disorders (e.g. Ehlers-Danlos syndrome)

Intestinal parasites Malnutrition Chronic cough (e.g. pertussis)
Hirschsprung’s disease Repair of imperforate anus Meningomyelocele

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance

History of excessive straining Underweight Clear cause from history
Other organ involvement Good disease outcome

Idiopathic

CF

Constipation

Diarrhoea

Connective Tissue

Possible No No No Yes

No Possible Yes Yes No

Yes No Yes Possible Yes

Yes Yes Yes Possible Possible

No Possible Possible Yes No

Recommended Investigations *** *** *** *** \*\*\*

Screening tests in blood for coeliac disease (CD) Stool for culture,
search for parasites Chest X-ray and nasopharyngeal swab in cases with
chronic cough Sweat test for CF Rectoscopy/sigmoidoscopy with possible
biopsy for cases with chronic diarrhoea (e.g. ulcerative colitis)

140

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

Top Tips • RP is more common in tropical and developing countries, due
to high prevalence of diarrhoea, malnutrition and parasitic infestation.
• Prolonged sitting on a child’s potty and straining predisposes for RP;
these should be avoided. • Once the cause of the RP is established, the
best advice is not to panic; the RP is likely to recur. • Parents and
affected older children have to be taught how to reduce prolapse at home
and told to seek medical assistance if this is not achieved. • Solitary
rectal ulcer syndrome manifests as rectal bleeding, constipation,
prolonged straining, mucous discharge and PR. The condition should not
be misdiagnosed as inflammatory bowel disease, polyps or complication
from PR. • Remember that CF is one of the most common causes of RP;
about 20% of CF patients have RP. • In contrast to adults, incidence and
recurrence of RP decrease as children grow older, and conservative
management is usually successful and indicated.

Red Flags • RP is usually painless or associated with mild discomfort;
pain suggests complications such as ulceration, ischaemia or proctitis.
• A sweat test is indicated in all children with RP who present without
a known underlying cause. • RP has to be differentiated from rarer
causes of prolapse resembling RP: prolapsed intussusception,
haemorrhoids and prolapsed polyp. The latter appears as a dark,
plum-coloured mass in contrast to the lighter pink mucosa appearance of
the RP. • Prolonged straining at defecation is a major cause for RP. •
Some mothers insist on placing the child, even an infant, on a potty to
strain for a long period. This puts the child at risk for RP.

FURTHER READING Urganci N, Kalyon CV, Ekes KG. Solitary rectal ulcer
syndrome in children: A report of six cases. Gut Liver
2013;7(6):752–755.

141

Genital

SCROTAL/TESTICULAR SWELLING Clinical Overview Following completion of
testicular descent, the processus vaginalis closes and its lower portion
becomes the tunica vaginalis testis. Failure to close results in a
patent processus allowing the development of the two most common causes
of painless scrotal swelling: hydrocele and inguinal hernia. Hydrocele
is caused by drainage of peritoneal fluid through a narrow patent
processus vaginalis (communicating hydrocele), while a wide patent
processus vaginalis causes inguinal hernia by allowing omentum or bowel
to pass into the scrotum. Failure to close the processus vaginalis in
females results in formation of a patent pouch of the peritoneum with
possible complication of inguinal hernia and hydrocele (hydrocele of
canal of Nuck). The four most common painful causes of testicular
swelling are testicular torsion, torsion of testicular appendage,
incarcerated inguinal hernia and epididymitis/orchitis. Children with
any of these causes may present as an acute scrotum, which is a medical
emergency defined as scrotal pain, swelling and redness.

Possible Diagnoses Infants

Children

Common Hydrocele Inguinal hernia Birth trauma affecting the genitalia
Epididymitis/orchitis Drainage from ascites

Hydrocele Inguinal hernia Testicular torsion Epididymitis/orchitis
Hydrocele of spermatic cord

Rare Testicular torsion Generalised oedema (e.g. nephrotic syndrome)
Testicular tumour (e.g. hamartoma)

Testicular tumour (germ tumour) Trauma (scrotal haematoma) Idiopathic
scrotal oedema (ISO) Generalised oedema Torsion of the spermatic cord
Varicocele Vasculitis (HSP)

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance

Acute onset Pain/tender Ill looking Fever/vomit Trans-illumination

Hydrocele

Inguinal Hernia

Testicular Torsion

Orchitis/ Epididymitis

Hydrocele Spermatic Cord

No No No No Yes

No No No No Yes

Yes Yes Yes Yes No

Yes Yes Yes Possible No

No No No No Yes

Recommended Investigations *** Urinalysis may suggest associated
urinary tract infection (UTI) in epididymitis, proteinuria for NS ***
Plasma albumin, urea and electrolytes and cholesterol for NS

142

** ** ** **

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

Plasma α-fetoprotein for any malignant testicular tumour (usually
elevated) Ultrasonography helps whether testis is present or merely
hydrocele  Colour Doppler ultrasonography assesses the testicular
morphology and testicular blood flow CT or MRI may delineate some
testicular tumour pre-operatively

Top Tips • Virtually all hydroceles are congenital in neonates and
infants. In a mobile child with hydrocele, the size characteristically
increases during daytime and decreases over nighttime. • Spermatic cord
hydrocele is uncommon and results from aberration in the closure of the
processus vaginalis. It is a loculated fluid collection along the
spermatic cord, separated from the testis and epididymis and located
above them. • Torsion of testicular appendix can be differentiated from
testicular torsion by the blue dot sign, which is a necrotic appendage
after undergoing torsion. • Epididymitis is the most common cause of
scrotal swelling in sexually active young adolescents. This is an
ascending infection from the urethra. • ISO, usually caused by allergy,
may mimic torsion. The scrotum is swollen and red in ISO, there are no
symptoms, and the testis characteristically feels normal and not tender.
ISO often extends to the groin and perineum. Parents can be reassured
that the swelling will disappear within a few days (without treatment),
leaving some purpuric discolouration. • Varicocele occurs in about 5% of
all adolescent boys and is a common cause of subfertility.

Red Flags • In the normal scrotum, 1–2 mL of serous fluid is present in
the tunica vaginalis and should not be mistaken for hydrocele. •
Acquired hydrocele can decrease the efficiency of spermatogenesis by
causing atrophic changes due to increased pressure on the blood supply
of the testis. In addition, tumours of the tunica vaginalis may be
obscured by hydrocele, hence the need for rapid treatment. • It is
critical to determine whether a scrotal mass is intra- or
extra-testicular. The majority of intra-testicular masses are malignant,
while extra-testicular masses are usually benign. • Be aware that
torsion of testis in neonates may be asymptomatic except for red scrotal
swelling. • In a suspected case of testicular torsion, clinicians should
not request any imaging or test. The diagnosis is clinical and imaging
is unnecessary. Surgical exploration is urgent. • Abrupt onset of
painful scrotal swelling is usually caused by incarcerated hernia or
testicular torsion. The onset of pain in torsion of testicular appendix
is usually gradual. • Epididymitis/orchitis may mimic testicular
torsion; the inflammation, however, is commonly secondary to viral
infection (e.g. mumps) or sexually transmitted disease (STD). In
addition, the pain is more gradual in epididymitis/orchitis and nausea
and vomiting is uncommon, often with fever, dysuria and pyuria.

FURTHER READING Dagur G, Gandhi J, Suh Y et al. Classifying hydroceles
of the pelvis and groin: An overview of the etiology, secondary
complications, evaluation and management. Curr Urol 2017;10(1):1–14.

143

Genital

VAGINAL DISCHARGE Clinical Overview Vaginal discharge (VD) is the most
common gynaecological problem in pre-pubertal children and adolescents.
Physiologically, it occurs in neonate girls who often experience vaginal
discharge (pseudo-menstruation) as a result of withdrawal of the
maternal oestrogen hormone. A rise of oestrogen at the onset of puberty
causes another physiological discharge (leucorrhoea). Pathological
conditions of VD include non-specific VD (occurring in up to 70% of
girls), which is caused by poor perineal hygiene, tendency of the labia
minora to open on squatting, and close proximity of the anal orifice to
the vagina allowing transfer of faecal bacteria to the vagina. Other
contributory factors include the use of systemic antibiotics and
steroids, wearing tight-fitting clothes such as tights, and the use of
irritants such as detergents and bubble bath. Children with VD present
with pruritus, frequent urination, dysuria, enuresis, sleep disturbance
or erythema of the vulva. Sexual abuse is a serious problem and a high
index of suspicion is required to make the diagnosis.

Possible Diagnoses Infants

Children

Common Physiological Candida infection Seborrhoeic dermatitis Atopic
dermatitis Vulvar psoriasis

Physiological VD Non-specific vulvovaginitis STD Foreign body (FB) Child
abuse

Rare Urethral prolapse Threadworms

Candida infection Contact and allergic dermatitis Threadworms Lichen
sclerosus Lichen planus Scabies Urethral prolapse Rhabdomyosarcoma

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance Foul odour Associated erythema
Positive bacteria finding Tear laceration Adolescent age

Physiological

Vulvovaginitis

STD

Foreign Body

Sexual Abuse

No No No No Possible

Possible Yes Possible No No

Yes Yes Yes Possible Yes

Yes Possible Possible Possible Possible

Possible Possible Possible Yes No

Recommended Investigations \*\*\* Urine sample for dipsticks and urine
culture for suspected UTI \*\*\* Swab from the discharge for Gram stain
and culture, and for Candida

144

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

\*\* Adhesive tape test to detect worm ova \*\* Imaging occasionally is
required, e.g. for suspected FB or tumour

Top Tips • The non-specific discharge of VD is typically brown or green
and has a mild foetid odour. It may be associated with bacterial
infection secondary to faecal contamination. • Threadworm infection
typically causes recurrent vulvovaginitis and manifests as nocturnal
scratching due to female worms depositing eggs on the perineum. •
Discharge caused by Candida infection is rare before puberty but may
occur in infancy. Risk factors in later age include systemic use of
antibiotics and steroids. • Child abuse refers to the use of children in
sexual activities (including fondling, masturbation, penetration) that
they do not understand or give consent to. • Note that the majority of
cases of physical examination on children suspected of child abuse do
not yield abnormal findings. This does not exclude child abuse. • Lichen
sclerosus is characterised by a sharply demarcated area of
hypopigmentation around the vulva and the perianal area. It is
associated with intense itching and bleeds easily with normal toilet
activities such as genital wiping.

Red Flags • The physiological discharge and bleeding in neonate girls is
usually creamy white and subsides when the child is 2 weeks old. Any
discharge or bleeding after 2–3 weeks warrants investigation. • FB
should be considered when the discharge has a foul odour. Common objects
include clumped toilet tissue or small parts of toys. Examination under
general anaesthesia may be indicated. • Children suffering from child
abuse may present with symptoms not related directly to their genitalia,
e.g. sleep disturbance, behaviour changes, phobias, anorexia, poor
school performance and social withdrawal. Later on, victims often
present with post-traumatic stress disorder. • The interview of the
child suspected of being sexually abused is the most valuable component
of medical evaluation, using the child’s words for body parts, drawings
and ageappropriate questions. Clinicians should not conduct the
interview unless they have skill and experience. • Beware that most
perpetrators of child abuse are family members, close relatives or
friends who typically began relating to the child during non-sexual
activities to gain the child’s trust. • UTI and threadworm infection are
common in cases of VD. Unless the UTI and threadworms are treated,
treatment for VD is inadequate and VD will recur.

FURTHER READING Ganguli S, Liu Q, Tsoumpariotis A et al. Vaginal
discharge in a prepubertal girl posing a diagnostic challenge. Cureus
2018;10(4):e2424. Stricker T, Navratil F, Sennhauser FH. Vulvovaginitis
in prepubertal girls. Arch Dis Child 2003;88:324–326.

12

CEREBRAL

ACUTE CONFUSIONAL STATE Clinical Overview Acute confusional state (ACS)
is characterised by sudden alteration of the mental state leading to an
inappropriate interaction with people and environment. It is
characterised by an acute and dramatic onset of disorientation, impaired
concentration and subtle motor signs such as tremor. Disorientation in
older children is most marked for time. A child presenting with ACS
should be regarded as a medical emergency. In the absence of a relevant
medical history (such as sickle-cell anaemia or medication), the
differential diagnosis can be quite difficult and challenging for
clinicians to make. Although delirium is sometimes called ACS, in
delirium, there is extreme disturbance of arousal, attention,
orientation and perception, commonly accompanied by fear and agitation.
Delirium is often associated with high fever which accompanies viral or
bacterial infection, e.g. pneumonia. In infants, ACS occurs as an
alteration of consciousness and is discussed later in this section.

Possible Diagnoses Infants Common See sections on “Coma” and “Transient
Loss of Consciousness”

Children

Migraine Side effect of medication (e.g. antihistamine)
Encephalitis/encephalopathy Non-convulsive status epilepticus (NCSE)
Psychosis Concussion Drug ingestion

Rare High fever Traumatic brain injury Hypoglycaemia Brain tumour,
haemorrhage Night terror Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) Metabolic
disorder (e.g. urea cycle disorder) Malignant hypertension Cerebral
venous sinus thrombosis Carbon monoxide poisoning

145

146

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance Positive family history
Previous/current hallucination, delusion Subtle movements Associated
headache Abnormal electroencephalogram (EEG)

Migraine

Medication

Encephalitis

NCSE

Psychosis

Yes No No Yes No

No No Possible No No

No No Possible Possible Yes

Possible No Yes No Yes

Possible Yes Possible Possible No

Recommended Investigations \*\*\* Blood glucose to exclude hypoglycaemia
\*\*\* Serological tests to exclude SLE \*\*\* EEG for seizure (such as
NCSE) or encephalitis \*\*\*  Neuroimaging with magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) or computed tomography (CT) scan for head injury,
encephalitis (herpetic encephalitis)

Top Tips • Nearly 10% of patients with migraine may present with
migraine variants of which 5% develop ACS. Typically patients present
with agitation, disorientation, speech difficulties and memory loss. The
majority complained of headache prior to the confusion. • EEG is
diagnostic in NCSE: IV anti-epileptic drugs will normalise the EEG and
resolve the ACS. • The first step in evaluating any child with psychosis
is to ask: is the child on any medication? In adolescence, illicit drugs
(cocaine, amphetamine and ecstasy) are a common cause. • Psychosis has
numerous neurological causes including brain tumour, central nervous
system infection and, most important in adolescents, drugs such as
amphetamine, cocaine and ecstasy. Mental psychosis should include
symptoms such as delusion, hallucination and paranoid ideation. •
Haloperidol is often used to treat ACS. The drug can cause unpleasant
extra-pyramidal side effects. Procyclidine is an effective antidote.

Red Flags • A confusional state of migraine often lasts several minutes
to hours. It may be the first presentation before the onset of typical
migraine attacks. • The diagnosis of the first episode of acute
confusional migraine is often difficult, particularly if a patient
presents with symptoms such as sudden blindness, numbness or
paraesthesias. • Be aware that minor trauma can occasionally trigger a
major ACS grossly disproportionate to the degree of trauma. • NCSE
should be considered in all children with ACS even if there is no
history of epilepsy. • Beware that patients with SLE may present
initially with psychotic manifestations (personality changes, depression
and agitation) before occurrence of classical features (e.g. malar
rash).

FURTHER READING Faroogi AM, Padilla JM, Monteith TS. Acute confusional
migraine: Distinct clinical or spectrum of migraine biology? Brain Sci
2018;8(2):29.

147

Cerebral

DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITY Clinical Overview Developmental disability (DD)
is a heterogeneous group of chronic conditions that include problems in
cognitive functioning, physical functioning or both. Intellectual
disability (or intellectual developmental disorder) encompasses the
cognitive part, which is broadly related to thought process. DD results
in limitation in areas of normal activities, including communication,
selfcare, social adaptation and physical functioning. The condition is
common affecting about 3% of the population, of which over 90% are
categorised as mild and about 5% as severe or profound. Most children
with mild disability are identified in the pre-school period because of
the inability to communicate, inability to take care of oneself
(including decision-making) and deficiency in participating in social
and school activities. Traditionally, DD has been grouped as prenatal
(e.g. chromosomal, genetic disorder, toxins or infection during
pregnancy), natal (e.g. prematurity, hypoxic-ischaemic encephalopathy
\[HIE\], infection) and postnatal causes (e.g. head injury, autism and
infection).

Possible Diagnoses Infants

Children

Common Extreme prematurity Intracranial haemorrhage Infection (e.g.
toxoplasmosis, rubella, cytomegalovirus and herpes \[TORCH\],
meningitis) Metabolic (e.g. hypoglycaemia) HIE Rare Inborn errors of
metabolism Primary microcephaly Congenital central nervous system (CNS)
malformation Seizures (e.g. infantile spasm) Fetal alcohol syndrome
Child abuse (physical, neglect)

Chromosomal (trisomy-21, fragile X syndrome) Idiopathic (cause
unidentified) Cerebral palsy (CP) Autism spectrum disorder Traumatic
brain injury

Genetic syndrome (e.g. fragile X syndrome) Post-infection Neurocutaneous
syndrome (e.g. tuberous sclerosis) Child abuse Metabolic (hypoglycaemia,
hypernatraemia) Toxins (e.g. lead) Mucopolysaccharidosis, galactosaemia
Inborn errors of metabolism Long-term malnutrition

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance Identified at birth Severe DD Acute
onset Motor disability Associated ID

Chromosomal

Idiopathic

CP

Autism

Head Injury

Yes Yes No Possible Yes

Possible Possible No Possible Possible

No Possible Possible Possible Possible

No Possible No No Yes

No Possible Yes Possible Possible

148

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

Recommended Investigations \*\*\* Urine for mucopolysaccharides;
reducing substance for galactosaemia \*\*\* Metabolic screen: blood
glucose, urea and electrolytes, organic acids, amino acids, ammonia
**  Serum uric acid for any boy with self-mutilation (Lesch-Nyhan
syndrome) **  Blood lead, serum copper and ceruloplasmin for Wilson’s
disease **  Serological and microbiological studies for congenital
(TORCH) infection **  White blood cell lysosomal enzyme or skin biopsy
for neuro-regression, optic atrophy ***  Genetic studies (e.g.
microarray, gene panel, exome or genome sequencing) for DD, ID, autism
spectrum disorder or congenital anomalies *** EEG for associated seizure
disorders \*\*\* Cranial MRI for focal seizures, neurocutaneous syndrome

Top Tips • Mild degree of DD may not manifest until toddler age or after
school entry and is usually present with delayed speech and language
development. • The long-used classification of DD based on IQ (mild:
55–69; moderate: 40–54; severe: &lt;40) is no longer used. New
classification of DD was based on the amount of support and supervision
that the individual needs: intermittent, limited, extensive and
pervasive. • The term mental retardation should not be used because of
undesirable stigma. Intellectual disability, developmental delay or
learning difficulty are more appropriate terms. • CP is the most common
cause of physical disability characterised by significant impairment in
movement and posture that begins in infancy or early childhood. •
Chromosomal microarray (CMA) should be the first test in the genetic
evaluation of children with DD including ID and autism spectrum
disorder. • Neglect (e.g. isolation, bullying) or child abuse is
recognised to cause DD. Neglect is three times more common than physical
abuse and tends to occur over a long period of time.

Red Flags • In a child with suspected DD: is the hearing and vision
normal? Inability to identify visual or hearing impairment causes social
isolation and psychological and emotional problems. • Be aware of the
difference between a child who has always had developmental disability
and one who developed normally and then lost motor or cognitive skill.
The latter needs an urgent evaluation as such regression may indicate a
neurodegenerative disease. • Red flags in suspected CP include a child
not sitting by 8 months, not walking by 18 months, the presence of
severe symptoms in the absence of a history of perinatal injury,
muscular hypotonia, paraplegia, normal MRI and abnormal basal ganglia
imaging. • Remember that toe walking is normal for several months in
toddlers. Any persistent toe walking requires referral. • Fragile X
syndrome is seen in 1 in 2,600 males and 1 in 4,200 females. Affected
children exhibit delayed speech and poor eye contact that are often
wrongly mistaken as signs of autism.

FURTHER READING Lee RW, Poretti A, Cohen JS et al. A diagnostic approach
for cerebral palsy in the genomic era. Neuromuscular Med
2014;18(4):821–844. Maenner MJ, Blumberg SJ, Kogan MD et al. Prevalence
of cerebral palsy and intellectual disability among children identified
in two US national surveys. Ann Epidemiol 2016;26(3):2011–2013. National
Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE). Cerebral palsy in under
25s: Assessment and management. NICE guideline 2017 (NG62).
https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng62

149

Cerebral

HEADACHE Clinical Overview Headache is a common symptom in children,
occurring in about 50% of children aged 7 years and 80% of children aged
15 years. It may be acute, acute recurrent, chronic recurrent or
progressive, caused by minor viral infections or severe underlying
disease such as CNS infection or increased intracranial pressure (ICP).
Therefore, careful evaluation of a child with headache is essential.
Infants or toddlers with headache present with irritability,
unwillingness to play, crying while holding the head or vomiting. The
most common causes of headache are acute viral infection, migraine and
tension headache. Migraine without aura is the most common type, defined
as a headache lasting 1–72 hours, plus two of the following: bilateral
or unilateral, pulsating, aggravated by routine physical activities,
plus at least one of the following: nausea and/or vomiting, photophobia
or phonophobia. Tension headache is diagnosed as headache lasting from
30 minutes to 7 days, in addition to two of the following:
pressing/tightening, non-pulsating, mild–moderate intensity, bilateral
with no nausea or vomiting.

Possible Diagnoses Infants

Children

Common Birth trauma causing cerebral irritability Viral infection
Migraine Head injury Subdural haematoma (e.g. child abuse)

Rare CNS infection Increased ICP

Common viral infections Migraine Tension headache Brain lesions (e.g.
tumour, haemorrhage) Sinusitis Medication overuse

Eye strain CNS infection (meningitis, brain abscess) Mitochondrial
disease such as mitochondrial encephalopathy, lactic acidosis and
stroke-like episodes (MELAS) Traumatic brain injury Medications Seizure
Hypertension Benign increased ICP (pseudotumour cerebri)

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance Normal daily activities Associated
fever Lasts less than 1 hour Morning symptoms Recurring

Viral Infection

Migraine

Tension Headache

Brain Lesion

Sinusitis

Yes Possible Yes No No

No No No No Yes

Possible No Possible Possible Yes

No No No Yes No

Possible Yes Possible Possible No

150

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

Recommended Investigations The vast majority of children presenting with
headaches do not require any investigation. The indication to use
neuroimaging is discussed in this section.

Top Tips • It is simple to differentiate the two most common causes of
headaches: migraine disrupts the child’s activity; tension headache does
not. • In families with a history of migraine, migraine variants are
common and include cyclic vomiting, paroxysmal vertigo, restless legs,
paroxysmal torticollis and abdominal migraine. • Recurrent headache such
as migraine is more than just a painful episode; it is often accompanied
by impaired academic performance, school absences, disturbed sleep and
poor quality of life. • In contrast to adults with migraine, childhood
migraine tends to be shorter in duration (1–48 hours), often bilateral
(frontal or bitemporal) with gastrointestinal symptoms, e.g. abdominal
pain. • Although analgesics such as paracetamol, ibuprofen and
sumatriptan are effective first-line treatments in migraine,
evidence-based treatment or prophylaxis is lacking. Prophylaxis is
considered for missing more than 3 days of school in a month and/or one
to two attacks per week. • A history of analgesic overuse can be a
contributory factor in headache chronicity because the headache may be
analgesic induced. Discontinuation of the analgesics improves the
headache. • Benign increased ICP (pseudotumour cerebri) is characterised
by increased ICP (e.g. headaches, vomiting and papilloedema) with normal
CSF and ventricular size. Focal neurological signs are absent.

Red Flags • Symptoms that require urgent attention include headaches
that wake a child from sleep, early morning vomiting without nausea,
worsening headache, associated personality changes or neurological
symptoms. • Be aware that frequent headache, including migraine, may be
caused by emotional, sexual and physical child abuse. • Basilar migraine
(presenting with vertigo, diplopia, blurred vision, ataxia) should be
differentiated from posterior fossa tumour. • Headache in association
with other neurological symptoms is common in brain tumours, but
headache may be the only symptom in some brain tumours. • In an infant
with cerebral haematoma, child abuse should be considered. Children may
present with irritability, vomiting, bulging fontanelle and focal
seizure. Fundoscopy may show retinal haemorrhage. Neuroimaging is
urgent. • Remember that MELAS may present with recurrent migraine-like
headaches.

FURTHER READING Shankin CJ, Ferrari U, Reinisch VM et al.
Characteristics of brain tumour-associated headache. Cephalalgia
2007;27(7):204–911. Tietjen GE, Buse DC, Fanning KM et al. Recalled
maltreatment, migraine, and tension-type headache. Neurology
2015;84(2):132–140.

151

Cerebral

FAINTING (TRANSIENT LOSS OF CONSCIOUSNESS) Clinical Overview Normally,
standing is associated with a transfer of blood to the legs causing
transient instability and a drop of blood pressure (BP) for 10–20
seconds. Reflex tachycardia and vasoconstriction restore BP within 30–60
seconds. Transient loss of consciousness, often referred to as blackout,
is common in children and includes syncope, epileptic causes and
non-epileptic causes. Syncope is by far the most common cause with a
lifetime incidence of about 40%. It is defined as transient and
self-limited loss of consciousness and postural tone due to transient
cerebral hypoperfusion. It is characterised by rapid onset, short
duration and spontaneous complete recovery. Orthostatic hypotension
denotes fall of BP on standing. Neurogenic orthostatic hypotension is
due to impaired sympathetic activation with a fall in BP with little or
no increase in heart rate (HR). In non-neurogenic orthostatic
hypotension, sympathetic activation is normal, leading to tachycardia
and hypotension. Postural tachycardia syndrome (POTS), common in persons
with migraine, is characterised by excessive increase in HR after a few
minutes’ standing while BP is minimally changed. As a significant number
of patients with syncope are misdiagnosed with epilepsy with serious
implications on the patients’ life, epilepsy is included in this
section.

Possible Diagnoses Infants

Children

Common Cardiac arrhythmia

Syncope (vasovagal faint) Seizure (epilepsy) Cardiac syncope Orthostatic
hypotension (neurogenic and non-neurogenic) POTS

Rare Toxins/poisoning/medication Pulmonary hypertension Mastocytosis
Takayasu arteritis (large vessel vasculitis) Cardiac arrhythmia (e.g.
long QT syndrome)

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance Occurs mainly in upright position
Abnormal high pulse on standing Commonly older than 10 years Low BP on
immediate standing Diagnosis by electrocardiogram (ECG) or EEG

Syncope

Seizure

Cardiac Syncope

Orthostatic Hypotension

POTS

Yes Possible Yes Yes No

No No No No Yes

No No No No Yes

Yes Possible Yes Possible No

Yes Yes Yes No Possible

152

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

Recommended Investigations \*\*\* F  ull blood count (FBC) and
C-reactive protein (CRP): leukocytosis and high CRP in infection \*\*\*
Lumbar puncture and blood culture (BC) for CNS infection \*\*\* Blood
sugar (BS) (Boehringer Mannheim (producing blood glucose test strips)
\[BM\] stick) to diagnose hyper- or hypoglycaemia \*\*\* Tilt-table
testing: very useful in children with unexplained syncope ***  ECG in
fainting to exclude long QT syndrome; event monitor or 24 hour ECG may
be necessary *** Plain X-ray for skull injury, skeletal survey for
suspected abuse \*\*\* EEG and neuroimaging for suspected epilepsy,
haemorrhage or mass

Top Tips • Most causes of impaired consciousness can be diagnosed from
the history alone; an eyewitness account is essential, e.g. if the event
occurred at school, a report from there is required. • Examination of a
child with fainting includes supine value of HR and BP at 1 and 3
minutes, followed by standing measurement of HR and BP at 1 and 3
minutes. A HR of &gt;30 beats/min between supine and standing suggests
POTS. • ECG is an essential tool to examine children with syncope,
possibly diagnosing WPW (Wolff–Parkinson–White) syndrome, long QT
syndrome, T-wave inversion, and ventricular hypertrophy.

Red Flags • Vasovagal syncope may be associated with brief limb
twitching, upward eye deviation, and even urinary incontinence. These
should not be misdiagnosed as epilepsy. Failure to recognise these
features often leads to wrong diagnosis and unnecessary administration
of anti-epileptic drugs. • QTc duration &gt;480 msec finding in the ECG
is a significant predictor for first syncope and patients are at high
risk for the development of subsequent syncope and fatal/near-fatal
events. • Arrhythmias are an important cause of loss of consciousness
and possible death; urgent referral to a cardiologist is indicated for
consideration of treatment with β-blockers. In refractory cases an
implantable pacemaker may be considered. • Sudden unexplained death in
the young has devastating effects on surviving family members. Death may
be due to long QT syndrome, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy or Brugada
syndrome. Family screening is required. • Before diagnosing epilepsy,
consider conditions that mimic seizures such as breath-holding spells,
syncope, narcolepsy and pseudo-seizure. Remember that the latter
frequently occurs in patients with a past history of epilepsy. EEG and
serum prolactin (increased in true epilepsy) help.

FURTHER READING Colan S. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in children. Heart
Fail Clin 2010;6(4):433–444. Liu JF, Jons L, Moss AJ et al. Risk factors
for recurrent syncope and subsequent fatal or near-fatal events in
children and adolescents with long QT syndrome. J Am Coll Cardiol
2011;57(8):941–950.

153

Cerebral

COMA Clinical Overview Prolonged and deeper impaired consciousness
(coma) usually results from traumatic brain injury, or intracranial
(e.g. infection) or metabolic (e.g. diabetic ketoacidosis) disorders.
Cerebral malaria and traumatic brain injury are the most common causes
of coma worldwide. Traumatic head injury, defined as injury to the
scalp, skull or brain, is a common event, and brain injuries are the
most frequent cause of trauma fatality among children. Compared to
adults, children have higher brain water content, the size of the head
is relatively larger than the rest of the body, and vasculature is
easily disrupted, hence the higher risk of epidural and subdural
haematoma.

Possible Diagnoses Infants

Children

Common Hypoxic-ischaemic encephalopathy Seizures Traumatic brain injury
Urea cycle disorder Intracranial infection Rare
Toxins/poisoning/medication Sudden infant death syndrome

Traumatic brain injury Seizure (epilepsy) Cerebral malaria Infection
(encephalitis) Drug toxicity

Diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA)/hypoglycaemia Hysteria Reye’s syndrome
Intracranial haemorrhage (e.g. stroke) Electrolytes disturbance (e.g.
hyponatraemia) Cardiac arrhythmia

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance History of trauma In tropics Previous
similar event Presence of fever Diagnosis by EEG

Head Injury

Seizure

Cerebral Malaria

Infection

Drug Toxicity

Yes Possible No No No

No Possible Possible No Yes

No Yes No Yes No

No Yes No Yes No

No Possible Possible Possible No

Recommended Investigations *** *** *** *** *** *** \*\*\*

FBC and CRP: leukocytosis and high CRP in infection Lumbar puncture and
BC for CNS infection BS (BM stick) to diagnose hyper- or hypoglycaemia
Tilt-table testing: very useful in children with unexplained syncope ECG
in fainting to exclude prolonged QT; 24-hour continuous ECG is often
required Plain X-ray for skull injury, skeletal survey for suspected
abuse EEG and neuroimaging for suspected epilepsy, haemorrhage or mass

154

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

Top Tips • Most causes of impaired consciousness can be diagnosed from
the history alone; so an eyewitness account is essential. • The Glasgow
coma scale is a valuable tool in assessing children with an altered
level of consciousness, particularly in cases with head trauma. •
Ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency (OTCD) is the most common urea
cycle disorder presenting during the neonatal period with an acute
hyper-ammonaemic coma, with lethargy, failure to thrive and vomiting. •
The main strategy of management for mild head injury is rest and
observation for 24–48 hours. • Hyperglycaemia hyperosmolar state (HHS)
is defined as serum glucose &gt;600 mg/dL, serum osmolality &gt;330
mOsm/kg, without significant ketosis or acidosis.

Red Flags • In children with head injury: life-threatening injury
includes Glasgow coma scale &lt;15, 2 hours after injury, open or
depressed skull fracture, worsening headache and irritability, basal
skull fracture. • Be suspicious of head injury in infants: the majority
of serious intracranial injuries (excluding road traffic accidents)
during the first year of life are due to abuse. • Before diagnosing
epilepsy, consider conditions that mimic seizures such as breath-­
holding spells, syncope, narcolepsy and pseudo-seizure. Remember that
the latter frequently occurs in patients with a past history of
epilepsy. EEG and serum prolactin (increased in true epilepsy) help. •
In any well neonate at birth who then becomes lethargic and vomits, OTCD
must be excluded. Immediate serum ammonia level measurement and dietary
protein withdrawal are essential. • Seizures are common in comatose
children; they can be extremely subtle and only diagnosed by EEG. •
Although DKA and HHS may overlap, DKA must be differentiated from HHS
because patients with HHS are severely dehydrated and require more
aggressive fluid therapy.

FURTHER READING Chiang JL, Kirkman MS, Laffel LMB et al. Type 1 diabetes
through the life span: A position statement of the American Diabetes
Association. Diabetes Care 2014;37(7):2034–2054. Garcia-Rodriguez JA,
Thomas RE. Office management of mild head injury in children and
adolescents. Can Fam Physician 2014;60(6):523–531. Garg K, Sharma R,
Gupta D et al. Outcome predictors in pediatric head trauma: A study of
clinico-radiological factors. J Pediatr Neurosci 2017;12(2):149–153.

155

Cerebral

NEUROMUSCULAR WEAKNESS Clinical Overview Acquired and hereditary
neuromuscular diseases are characterised by an abnormality of any
component of the lower motor neurone (LMN): anterior horn cell (e.g.
spinal muscular atrophy), peripheral nerve (e.g. Guillain–Barré syndrome
\[GBS\]), neuromuscular junction (e.g. myasthenia gravis) and muscle
including muscular dystrophies (e.g. Duchenne muscular dystrophy
\[DMD\]) and myopathies (congenital myotonia, mitochondrial disease).
LMN lesion may manifest as normal intellect, markedly reduced muscle
power (paralysis), reduced muscle bulk and reduced muscle tone often
with diminished reflexes and presence of fasciculation (present with
anterior horn cell disease). Diseases of the LMN may be inherited or
acquired, with acute onset within days or weeks (poliomyelitis, GBS) or
chronic. Weakness must be differentiated from hypotonia, fatigue and
ataxia.

Possible Diagnoses Infants

Children

Common Spinal muscular atrophy

Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) Peripheral nerve (e.g. Guillain–Barré
syndrome) Neuromuscular junction (e.g. myasthenia gravis) Muscular
dystrophy (e.g. DMD) Congenital myopathy

Congenital myasthenia Congenital muscular dystrophy Congenital
myopathies Rare Familial dysautonomia (Riley-Day syndrome) Infant
botulism

Dermatomyositis Metabolic myopathies Spinal tumour Botulism Acute
flaccid myelitis Endocrine myopathy (e.g. hypothyroidism) Periodic
paralysis (hyper- and hypokalaemic) Drugs (e.g. steroids) Motor neurone
disease Transient myelitis

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance

Acute onset Early facial involvement Calf hypertrophy Fasciculation High
serum creatinine kinase (CK)

SMA

Guillain–Barré Syndrome

Myasthenia

DMD

Myopathy

No No No Yes No

Yes No No No No

No Yes No No No

No No Yes No Yes

Possible Yes No No No

Recommended Investigations \*\*\* Serum electrolytes for unexplained
episodic paralysis \*\*\* Thyroid function test in suspected
thyroid-related disorders

156

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

\*\*\* Serum creatinine phosphokinase for muscle diseases such as DMD
**  Serum lactate and pyruvate for mitochondrial disease *** 
Anti-acetylcholine receptor or anti-muscle specific kinase antibody in
serum or plasma and edrophonium or neostigmine test may confirm
myasthenia gravis *\*\* ECG monitoring for cardiac involvement, e.g. DMD
\*\*\* EMG can differentiate between neuropathic and myopathic disorders
\*\*  Muscle biopsy

Top Tips • Examination of a child with weakness should always begin with
observation, including the head (shape and size), face (for
dysmorphism), eyes (for strabismus, ophthalmoplegia), skin, and muscles
(for any lesion, atrophy, hypertrophy, fasciculation) and gait
(waddling, ataxic), and whether there is difficulty in rising up from
the floor. • Remember that proximal muscle weakness (shoulders and hips)
indicates a myopathy, while distal weakness (hands) indicates a
neuropathy. Myotonic dystrophy is an exception, with weakness affecting
the hands. • Children with congenital myopathies are distinguished from
muscular dystrophies by facial weakness and normal or mildly elevated
serum CK level. • Both hypothyroidism and hyperthyroidism can cause
proximal muscle myopathies; patients with Grave’s disease may cause
ophthalmoplegia.

Red Flags • Infant botulism should be considered in infants with acute
bulbar dysfunction and hypotonia. • In a boy with an inability to walk
by the age of 18 months, DMD has to be excluded by serum CK. • Children
with periodic paralysis are normal between episodes. Later these become
more frequent, causing permanent weakness. • Children with
leukodystrophies may cause diagnostic confusion as they have both upper
and lower motor lesions.

FURTHER READING Dowling JJ, Gonorazky HD, Cohn RD et al. Treating
pediatric neuromuscular disorders: The future is now. Am J Med Genet A
2018;176(4):804–841. McDonald CM. Clinical approach to the diagnostic
evaluation of hereditary and acquired neuromuscular diseases. Phys Med
Rehabil Clin N Am 2012;23(3):495–563. Nayak R. Practical approach to the
patient with acute neuromuscular weakness. World J Clin Cases
2017;5(7):270–279.

157

Cerebral

SEIZURE Clinical Overview The term seizure is preferable to the term
convulsion, as some seizures have no abnormal convulsive movements.
Seizures are common in the paediatric population, occurring in 5%–7% of
children. The normal organised tonic-clonic seizure patterns seen in
older infants and children are not seen in neonates. Seizure patterns in
neonates include focal clonic, multi-focal jerks, apnoea eye blinking
and jitteriness. In young children, febrile seizure (FS) is the most
common cause of seizure occurring in 3%–4%, followed by epileptic
seizure occurring in 1%. Epilepsy should not be diagnosed unless
seizures are recurrent and unprovoked (e.g. by fever or hypoglycaemia).
Epilepsy can be generalised (e.g. absence, myoclonic, tonic-clonic),
focal (e.g. temporal lobe epilepsy) and epileptic spasms (e.g. infantile
spasms). Seizures have to be differentiated from non-epileptic seizures
(e.g. pseudo-seizure, breath-holding attacks) defined as motor activity
or behaviour that resembles epileptic seizures but without
abnormal/excessive discharges of neurones (EEG normal).

Possible Diagnoses Infants

Children

Common HIE Cerebral haemorrhage Metabolic (e.g. hypoglycaemia,
hypocalcaemia) Infection (e.g. meningitis) Developmental/malformation
Neonatal epilepsy syndromes Neonatal withdrawal syndrome Rare Fifth-day
seizure (benign idiopathic neonatal seizure) Inborn errors of metabolism
Mitochondrial disease Pyridoxine dependent

Febrile seizure Epilepsy (generalised and focal) Metabolic (e.g.
hypoglycaemia) Infection (encephalitis) Non-epileptic seizures
(pseudo-seizure)

Cerebral haemorrhage Intracranial tumours Drug induced Menkes kinky-hair
disease

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance Positive family history Previous
episode Associated fever Age younger than 5 years Usually generalised

Febrile Seizure

Epilepsy

Possible

Possible

Metabolic No

Infection No

Pseudo-Seizure No

Possible Yes Yes

Yes No Possible

Possible No Yes

No Yes Yes

Possible No No

Yes

Possible

Yes

Possible

Yes

Recommended Investigations \*\*\* Blood: FBC, CRP, blood culture,
electrolytes, glucose, calcium, magnesium, urea \*\*\* Prolactin blood
level if pseudo-seizure is suspected (high in genuine seizure)

158

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

\*\*\* EEG for afebrile seizures \*\*\*  Neuroimaging for suspected
encephalitis, abscess, focal seizures, complex partial seizures and
increased intracranial pressure

Top Tips • Seizures occur during the neonatal period more than at any
other period in children because of the high incidence of infections,
trauma to the brain, structural lesions of the brain and metabolic
disorders. HIE is the most common cause of neonatal seizures. • In
neonatal seizures, subsequent developmental delay, cerebral palsy,
epilepsy and death are related to low Apgar scores at 5 minutes. • FS is
a benign condition provoked by sudden rise of fever. Investigation in an
otherwise healthy child is unnecessary except for urine examination. •
The minimum workup metabolic screen in neonates includes serum amino
acids, urine organic acids and blood lactate for mitochondrial disease.
For the first unprovoked seizure in an otherwise healthy child, include
blood tests for glucose, calcium, magnesium, electrolytes and urea, and
an EEG. • Prolonged seizure, unresponsiveness to anti-epileptic drugs
(AEDs), and the need for more than one AED to control the seizure are
poor prognostic features in any seizure type. • Hypomagnesaemia
(magnesium &lt;1.5 mg/dL) is very often associated with hypocalcaemia.
The seizure will not respond to calcium but intramuscular injection of
magnesium will correct both conditions. • Seizures occurring during the
initial phase of sleep or on waking in an older child are suggestive of
benign partial epilepsy (Rolandic) (10%–15% of all childhood epilepsy)
or juvenile myoclonic epilepsy (5%–10% of all childhood epilepsy). •
Pseudo-seizure can sometimes be difficult to differentiate from
epileptic seizure: video recording and serum prolactin (increased in
true epilepsy) can help.

Red Flags • Neonatal seizures may be the only sign of CNS structural
abnormality, including malformation. Their recognition is critical as
presentation is often subtle (such as oral-lingual movements). • FS
should be differentiated from meningitis; children with CNS infection
were usually unwell with headache, vomiting and lethargy before the
onset of the seizure, with more persistent post-ictal impaired or loss
of consciousness. • Remember that epilepsy is more than just a seizure.
It is associated with significant comorbidities, including learning
disability, anxiety and depression. Children are at risk for early
mortality and sudden unexplained death in epilepsy. • Medication
noncompliance is an important cause of status epilepticus. Children with
epilepsy should adhere to the prescribed medication regimen. • Focal
seizures are often more serious than generalised seizures. Focal
seizures can be the presenting features of herpes encephalitis or
cerebral tumours. Timely neuroimaging is essential.

FURTHER READING Pavone P, Corsello G, Ruggieri M et al. Benign and
severe early-life seizures: A round in the first year of life. Ital J
Pediatr 2018;44:54. Stafstrom CE, Carmant L. Seizures and epilepsy: An
overview for neuroscientists. Cold Spring Harb Perspective Med
2015;5(6):a022426.

159

Cerebral

SLEEP DISORDERS Clinician Overview Children require sufficient sleep,
but the amount required as sufficient varies. Young infants need on
average 14 hours of sleep per 24 hours, which is almost evenly
distributed throughout the day and night due to incompletely developed
circadian rhythm. Children aged 6–12 years require about 10–11 hours and
teens about 9 hours. Insomnia is characterised by difficulty in
initiating and/or maintaining sleep, waking too early or having restless
sleep. It is fairly normal for infants to wake several times at night;
some 30% of infants do this. Older children (4–12 years) commonly
present with bedtime resistance. Insufficient sleep at night is likely
to affect the child’s mood and behaviour during the day, leading to
school problems such as reduced attention span, aggressiveness and poor
performance. Sleep-related breathing disorders include central sleep
apnoea and obstructive sleep apnoea. Parasomnia is disruptive
sleep-related disorders occurring during the non-rapid eye movement
(NREM) sleep such as sleepwalking, sleep terrors and confusional
arousal. Those disorders occurring during rapid eye movement (REM) sleep
include absent sleep paralysis. Hypersomnia, or excessive sleep,
includes narcolepsy.

Possible Diagnoses Infants

Children

Common Any illness, any pain or discomfort Obstructive sleep apnoea
(OSA) Drugs Normal sleep patterns

Insomnia for any illness, pain or itching Sleep-related breathing
disorders Parasomnia (e.g. nightmares) Hypersomnia (e.g. narcolepsy)
Sleep-related epilepsies

Rare Pierre Robin sequence Congenital hypoventilation syndrome

Sleep-related movement disorders Side effects of drugs
(methylphenidate), caffeine Kleine–Levin syndrome (KLS) Sleeping
sickness (African trypanosomiasis) Central sleep apnoea

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance Mostly in infants Excessive movements
Disruptive sleep Long daytime sleep EEG diagnostic

Insomnias

Breathing-Disorders

Parasomnia

Hypersomnia

Sleep-Related Epilepsies

Yes Yes Yes Possible No

Possible Possible Yes Possible No

No Yes Yes Possible No

No No No Yes No

No Yes Possible No Yes

Recommended Investigations In the vast majority of cases, investigations
are unlikely to be required. **  Polysomnography with oxygen saturation
monitoring is very useful for insomnia evaluation, such as OSA,
narcolepsy and nocturnal seizures ** HLA DQB1\*06,02 can be a useful
marker in patients with narcolepsy and cataplexy

160

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

Top Tips • Small infants often have apnoea episodes at night, which are
harmless, lasting usually less than 10 seconds, and are not associated
with cyanosis, decreased oxygen saturation or bradycardia. • Nightmares
are differentiated from night terrors by easy recall of the event. Night
terrors are usually associated with a cry or piercing scream; the child
looks flushed, frightened and agitated, and is not easily aroused. The
child cannot recall the event the next morning. • OSA, which manifests
as snoring and frequent cessation of sleep, is an important cause of
insomnia. Children with Down’s syndrome, triangular chin and long soft
palate are at risk of having OSA. The child may need tonsillectomy
and/or adenoidectomy. • During sleepwalking, parents should not try to
waken or restrain the child. Telling the child about the event is
unnecessary. If episodes are frequent, scheduled waking may help: the
child is gently and briefly woken 15–30 minutes before the episode is
due, and this is repeated for a month. • Narcolepsy is characterised by
recurring daytime sleepiness, often associated with disrupted sleep at
night, cataplexy (loss of muscle control when, for example, laughing),
sleep paralysis and hypnagogic phenomenon (auditory or visual illusion
or hallucination when falling asleep). • In contrast to narcolepsy,
Kleine–Levin syndrome is rare. It is characterised by long and recurrent
hypersomnia, hyperphagia and sometimes hypersexuality. • Although many
parents and clinicians often turn to medication to treat child insomnia,
it is far more important to search for any underlying cause (e.g.
anxiety) that needs to be treated first.

Red Flags • Children with narcolepsy may not only present with daytime
sleepiness but also with behaviour problems, irritability and
deterioration of school performance. • Narcolepsy is a lifelong problem.
Although the tricyclic antidepressant clomipramine remains the main
treatment, remember that it may cause numerous and unpleasant side
effects: constipation, urinary retention and dry mouth. • Sleepwalking
occurs occasionally in 20%–40% and frequently in 3%–4%. The typical age
is 4–8 years. Serious accidents may occur; securing the home (e.g.
windows, locked doors) is essential. • Beware of several sleep-related
epileptic seizures: benign partial epilepsy with centrotemporal spikes
(rolanic), benign epilepsy with affective symptoms, benign occipital
epilepsy and Panayiotopoulos syndrome. Autonomic symptoms and secondary
generalisation may occur in these sleep-related epilepsies. • Be aware
of nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy (NFLE), which may mimic night
terrors. A child with NFLE has a variety of motor features (kicking,
hitting, thrashing, cycling and scissoring of the legs) and vocalisation
(shouting, grunting, screaming and coughing). EEG may help in
establishing diagnosis.

FURTHER READING El-Shakankiry HM. Sleep physiology and sleep diseases in
children. Nat Sci Sleep 2011;3:101–114. Jarrin DC, McGrath JJ, Drake CL.
Beyond sleep duration: Distinct sleep dimensions are associated with
obesity in children and adolescents. Int J Obes (Lond)
2013;37(4):552–558. Thorpy MJ. Classification of sleep disorders.
Neurotherapeutics 2012;9(4):687–701.

161

Cerebral

TREMOR Clinical Overview Hyperkinetic movements are involuntary and
excess movements that include dystonia, chorea, athetosis, myoclonia,
tics and tremor. Of these, tremor is the most common type in children,
which is a rhythmic, involuntary oscillation of part of the body,
usually the hands, neck or head (titubation). It is classified as rest
tremor (e.g. Parkinson’s disease or drug induced), which is noted when
the hands are resting on the lap, and the more common action tremor,
which is produced by voluntary muscle contraction. Action tremor is
either postural when affected arms are extended in front of the body
(e.g. physiological or essential tremor) or target-directed movement
such as intention (e.g. cerebellar tremor). Tremor is absent during
sleep. It may be associated with serious neurological or metabolic
disease. Tremor needs to be differentiated from tics and chorea.

Possible Diagnoses Infants

Children

Common Normal jitteriness/tremor Infants of maternal addiction Seizure
(e.g. hypoglycaemia) Infantile tremor syndrome Cerebral irritation

Physiological tremor Essential tremor (ET) Psychogenic Medications (e.g.
β-2 agonists for asthma) Cerebellar tremor

Rare Ataxic cerebral palsy Wilson’s disease Acute confusional state
Writing tremor Fragile X–associated tremor Pheochromocytoma
Hyperthyroidism Cerebello-thalamo-cortical tremor Juvenile Parkinson’s
disease Autosomal dominant familial cortical myoclonic tremor Acute
intermittent porphyria

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance Positive family history Present at
rest Progressive Associated ataxia

Physiological

Essential

Psychogenic

Medications

Cerebellar

No Possible No No

Yes No Yes No

No Yes Possible No

No Yes No Possible

No No Yes Yes

Recommended Investigations \*\*\* Urine copper and serum ceruloplasmin
in suspected cases of Wilson’s disease \*\*\* Urine for toxicology from
a neonate, and if possible from the mother

162

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

\*\*\* Thyroid function tests for suspected hyperthyroidism \*\*\*
Imaging of the brain for cerebral or cerebellar causes

Top Tips • Children with unexplained hepatitis should be screened for
Wilson’s disease. • Common benign neonatal non-epileptic movements
include tremor (jitteriness) and sleep myoclonia. Tremor, a rhythmic
involuntary movement of equal amplitude, is common in healthy neonates,
occurring in up to two-thirds during the first 3 days of life. • Drug
addiction (e.g. cocaine, heroin, amphetamine) among pregnant women has
increased steadily over the years. The result is an increased incidence
of neonatal withdrawal syndrome with irritability, jitteriness and
occasionally seizures. A detailed maternal drug history is essential. •
Physiological tremor is a fine tremor and rarely visible to the eye. It
occurs in most individuals when the arms are extended. Tremor is
enhanced by anxiety, stress or caffeine intake. More subtle tremor can
be demonstrated by holding a piece of paper in outstretched hands. • ET
is the most common type of tremor: autosomal dominant (30%–60%),
typically slowly progressive, symmetrically bilateral and significantly
worsening during action like handwriting and spiral drawing. • Tremor
needs to be differentiated from tics, which are actually jerks,
non-rhythmic and can affect any muscle; tics can be temporarily
suppressed. Chorea is non-rhythmic, irregular, more rapid than tremor,
jerky and predominately affects the face. • Drugs causing tremor include
amphetamine, asthma medications such as β-2 agonist and theophylline,
lithium, anticonvulsants such as valproate, and tricyclic
antidepressants. Of these, the β-2 agonist salbutamol is by far the most
common drug causing tremor and tachycardia. Although these are benign,
parents should be made aware of these side effects.

Red Flags • Neonatal tremor/jitteriness is frequently misdiagnosed as
seizure resulting in unnecessary investigations and treatment with
anticonvulsants. This tremor has no abnormal gaze or eye movement,
cyanosis, bradycardia or tachycardia; it is provoked by stretching a
joint and stops on holding the limb. • Any neonatal tremor may be due to
prenatal exposure to maternal marijuana or neonatal withdrawal effect
from other narcotic use. It often persists for 30 days. History taking
is essential. • Essential tremor is often confused with cerebellar
tremor as both worsen with action. Cerebellar tremor is typically
intentional and is associated with ataxia and other cerebellar signs. •
In any child with progressive or acute tremor, serious conditions such
as Wilson’s disease, hyperthyroidism, hypoglycaemia, hypocalcaemia,
neuroblastoma and pheochromocytoma have to be excluded.

FURTHER READING Huntsman RJ, Lowry NJ, Sankaran K. Non-epileptic motor
phenomena in the neonate. Paediatr Child Health 2008;13(8):680–684.

13

ENDOCRINE

DELAYED PUBERTY Clinical Overview Puberty begins with the secretion of
the pituitary gonadotropins, follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) and
luteinising hormone (LH), which stimulate sex steroids testosterone and
eostradiol to induce the appearance of secondary sexual characteristics.
Breast bud appears in females between 8 and 13 years. Menarche occurs at
the median age of 13 years, 2–3 years after the appearance of breast
bud. Penile and scrotal enlargement usually occurs 1 year after the
testicular enlargement over 4 mL. Delayed puberty (DP) is defined as a
delay of pubertal changes (absence of breast bud) beyond 13 years in
girls or incompletion of puberty within 5 years from the occurrence of
breast bud. In males, DP is defined as testes &lt;4 mL aged 14 years, or
an absence of secondary sexual signs by the age of 16 years, or
incompletion of puberty within 5 years from its start. The cause of DP
in the vast majority of boys and in most girls is constitutional, which
is usually associated with delayed growth and skeletal maturation and
positive history in the parents. The exceptions to that are boys with
Klinefelter’s syndrome (XXO gonadal dysgenesis), who are tall with long
arms and legs, having normal adrenarche but small testes.

Possible Diagnoses Infants

Children

Common Not applicable

Constitutional Functional hypo-gonadotropic hypogonadism (FHH)
Structural hypo-gonadotropic hypogonadism (SHH) Intensive physical
exercise Gonadal failure (Turner’s, Noonan’s syndromes)

Rare Central nervous system (CNS) tumour (craniopharyngioma)
Prader-Willi syndrome Hyperprolactinaemia Laurence–Moon–Biedl syndrome
Irradiation of the gonads, chemotherapy Following bone marrow
transplantation Testicular feminisation syndrome Chronic psychiatric
disorders Klinefelter’s syndrome

163

164

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance Otherwise healthy Short stature
Positive family history Delayed bone age FSH, LH levels

Constitutional

FHH

SHH

Intense Physical

Gonadal Failure

Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes

No Possible No Possible Possible

No Yes No Yes Yes

Yes No No No Possible

Possible Yes No Possible No

Recommended Investigations *** Full blood count (FBC), C-reactive
protein (CRP): anaemia with high CRP suggests Crohn’s disease ***
Screening blood tests for coeliac disease \*\*\* Hormonal assay: levels
of FSH/LH, gonadotropin-releasing hormone \*\*\* Thyroid function tests
for suspected thyroid disorders *** Chromosomal analysis for suspected
cases of Turner’s (X0) and Klinefelter’s (XXY) syndromes *** Wrist
X-ray for bone age *** Pelvic ultrasound scan to detect ovarian cysts
or tumour; testicular ultrasound for tumour *** Radiological
investigation for suspected case of Crohn’s disease \*\*\*  Cranial MRI
of the head for hypo-gonadotropic hypogonadism to exclude CNS
pathologies

Top Tips • When using the Tanner growth chart for pubertal stages in a
child with DP, the heights of the parents and siblings should be
obtained. • Children with constitutional DP can be reassured. This is a
normal variant of puberty timing with good outcome for final height and
future reproductive capacity. • Puberty can be assessed by bone age
(wrist X-ray): if bone age is within 1 year of the child’s age, puberty
has not or has only just started; bone age within 2 years indicates the
child is in puberty. • A case of a very thin child with DP suggests the
possibility of anorexia nervosa or excessive sport activity, while
obesity may suggest Prader-Willi or Laurence–Moon–Biedl syndrome. • In
girls with DP and short stature, Turner’s syndrome should be considered.
Pelvic ultrasound scan and chromosomal analysis should be carried out.
High levels of FSH and LH are found. • Remember that girls with Turner’s
syndrome achieve normal adrenarche and axillary hair at appropriate age.
They do not develop menstruation. • Hormonal treatment is often
indicated in boys in constitutional DP (with oxandrolone aged 11.5 years
and testosterone aged over 13.5 years) and in girls (with
ethinylestradiol or oestrogens) if the DP and/or growth are causing
distress or school underperformance.

Endocrine

165

Red Flags • While the principal cause of DP in boys is constitutional,
girls have more frequent pathological causes, e.g. anorexia nervosa,
chronic diseases, intensive exercise or chromosomal abnormalities. •
Constitutional DP is a diagnosis of exclusion; therefore, alternative
causes should be considered, including functional HH causing transient
DP (e.g. malabsorption, renal insufficiency, anorexia), structural HH
causing permanent DP (CNS pathologies) and gonadal failure in both
sexes. • Beware that chronic diseases (e.g. Crohn’s and coeliac
diseases) may initially present as DP. • All girls with an inguinal
hernia should undergo a pelvic ultrasound scan examination before the
operation to exclude testicular feminisation (currently termed androgen
insensitivity syndrome). • In girls with otherwise normal sexual
maturation but delayed menarche and galactorrhoea, prolactinoma is
likely. Urgent prolactin level and MRI of the brain should be
considered.

FURTHER READING Bozzola M, Bozzola E, Montalbano C et al. Delayed
puberty versus hypogonadism: A challenge for the pediatricians. Ann
Pediatr Endocrinol Metab 2018;23(2):57–61.

166

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

HEIGHT, EXCESSIVE (TALL STATURE) Clinical Overview Growth is influenced
by many factors such as hereditary, genetic, illness, nutritional,
medication, hormonal and psychological influences. Tall stature is
defined as a height of more than 2.0 standard deviations or a height
above the 97th centile for age and sex. The condition is a less common
reason for concern and referral to specialist than short stature. As a
general rule, a child’s potential height ranges between the averages of
the parents’ heights. Tall parents usually have tall children. The
incidence of pathology in cases of tall stature is very low (around
1%–2%). Although growth hormone (GH) is known to be responsible for
gigantism and acromegaly, other conditions associated with an excessive
GH secretion and possible gigantism include McCune–Albright syndrome
(incidence of gigantism 15%–20%).

Possible Diagnoses Infants

Children

Common Hereditary/genetic Hyperinsulinism Large-of-date babies Infant of
diabetic mother Overweight

Hereditary/genetic Constitutional Klinefelter’s syndrome (chromosome:
47, XXY) Obesity Precocious puberty (McCune–Albright syndrome) Marfan’s
syndrome

Rare Sotos’ syndrome Beckwith–Wiedemann syndrome

Pituitary Gigantism Sotos’ syndrome Beckwith–Wiedemann syndrome
Homocystinuria Hypogonadism Neurofibromatosis Hyperthyroidism Proteus
syndrome Congenital generalised lipodystrophy

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance Tall parents Normal physical
examination Normal linear growth rate Comorbidity Advanced bone age

Familial

Constitutional

Yes Yes Yes No No

Possible Yes No No Yes

Klinefelter’s Syndrome No No No Yes No

Obesity Possible No No Yes Yes

Precocious Puberty No No No Yes Yes

Recommended Investigations \*\*\* Urine for homocystine \*\*\*
Insulin-growth factor 1 and GH in blood: in cases of pituitary
gigantism, acromegaly

Endocrine

** *** *** *** *\*\*

167

Plasma levels of FSH, LH for Klinefelter’s syndrome Karyotyping for
suspected cases of Klinefelter’s syndrome Skeletal X-ray for a child
with precocious puberty (e.g. McCune–Albright syndrome) Echocardiography
for Marfan’s syndrome to exclude aneurysm Cranial MRI for suspected
pituitary tall stature to exclude adenoma

Top Tips • Child’s length or height must be measured accurately. In
children younger than 24 months, recumbent length and standing height
are not the same; the former being significantly greater. Measurement
with tape is inaccurate. • Girls are more likely than boys to be
concerned early about their tall stature. Society perceives tall and
slender girls as beautiful, but not those with excessive height. • The
most common cause of tall stature is familial or genetic (about 80%).
Children are tall from early childhood, have tall parents, high normal
growth rate and a bone age compatible with chronological age.
Constitutional tall stature is associated with normal length at birth,
early accelerated growth that slows down after the age of 4–5 years and
slightly or moderately advanced bone age. • Over 50% of obese children
have a height in the 70%–99% range on the centile chart. • Although
treatment with oestrogen in tall girls and androgen in tall boys may be
effective, this is associated with numerous side effects, and is
controversial. Epiphysiodesis for predicted adult height of &gt;205 cm
in boys and &gt;185 in girls should be considered.

Red Flags • Beware that some tall children, especially girls, may be
teased and ridiculed leading to psychiatric problems such as anxiety,
depression and social withdrawal. They are also at risk of developing
orthopaedic problems, e.g. kyphosis and scoliosis. • One important cause
of tall stature is precocious puberty occurring simultaneously with
premature sexual development. The skin should be examined for
café-au-lait maculae to exclude McCune–Albright syndrome, which is also
associated with bone fibrous dysplasia. • Be aware that children with
Klinefelter’s syndrome often present with complaints other than height,
e.g. gynaecomastia, behaviour problems such as aggressiveness, excessive
shyness and antisocial acts such as fire setting and crimes. • Children
with Marfan’s syndrome are at risk of early death because of progressive
aortic dilatation and rupture. Arachnodactyly and lens dislocation are
important clues that need to be differentiated from homocystinuria that
is associated with developmental delay.

FURTHER READING Stalman SE, Pons A, Wit JM et al. Diagnostic work-up and
follow-up children with tall stature: A simplified algorithm for
clinical practice. J Clin Res Pediatr Endocrinol 2015;7(4):260–267.

168

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

PRECOCIOUS PUBERTY Clinical Overview Normal sexual development begins in
girls with breast development, followed by the appearance of pubic hair
(sometimes simultaneously with breast development), axillary hair, onset
of menstruation, acne and adult body odour. In boys, it begins with
testicular enlargement followed by enlargement of the penis, the
appearance of pubic hair, deepening of the voice, acne and adult body
odour. Precocious puberty (PP) is defined as puberty occurring at an
unusual age, i.e. before the age of 8 years in girls or before 9 years
in boys. Puberty nowadays starts earlier than in previous generations.
Puberty depends on increased production of kisspeptin in the
hypothalamus resulting in increased gonadotropin-releasing hormone
(GnRH), which acts on the pituitary to release the gonadotropins LH and
FSH, which stimulate sex hormone production by the gonads. The causes of
PP are best divided into gonadotropin-dependent central (idiopathic or
with identifiable causes), gonadotropinindependent (adrenal and gonadal
causes) or partial PP (thelarche, adrenarche, menarche). In more than
90% of girls and 50% of boys, the cause of PP is idiopathic, i.e. no
identifiable cause. The main differentiating feature between central
(hypothalamic) and adrenal causes is that the PP is always isosexual in
the former and testes remain small in the latter cause.

Possible Diagnoses Infants

Children

Common CNS injury Adrenal (e.g. congenital adrenal) Ovarian (e.g.
McCune–Albright) Iatrogenic (external sex hormones) PPP (e.g. premature
thelarche)

Partial (incomplete) precocious puberty (PPP) Central idiopathic
precocious puberty Central with identifiable causes (e.g. hamartoma)
Gonads (ovarian cysts, McCune–Albright syndrome) Adrenal (e.g.
congenital adrenal hyperplasia, tumour)

Rare Iatrogenic (external sources of sex hormones) Irradiation of the
brain Familial PP in males Teratoma (e.g. in the mediastinum)

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance

Normal growth Gonadotropin dependent More in girls than in boys Advanced
bone age High FSH+LH

PPP

Idiopathic Central PP

Central PP with a Cause

Gonad-Causing PP

Adrenal Causing PP

Yes No Yes No No

No Yes Yes Yes Yes

No Yes No Yes Yes

No No No Yes No

No No No Yes No

Recommended Investigations \*\*\* Hormonal assay of GnRH, LH, FSH \*\*\*
GnRH stimulation test (in central PP, the LH and FSH levels are
increased)

Endocrine

169

***  Serum level of I7-hydroxyprogesterone, dehydroepiandrosterone,
cortisol and aldosterone in cases of congenital adrenal hyperplasia
(CAH) *** Wrist X-ray to assess bone maturation \*\*\* Pelvic ultrasound
scan and adrenal visualisation for CAH \***  Computed tomography scan
or MRI of the head for all cases suspected of central causes of PP
**  Skeletal survey for bony fibrous dysplasia for a child with PP and
hyperpigmented spots

Top Tips • Puberty can easily be assessed by bone age: if bone age is
within 1 year of chronological age, puberty either has not or has just
started; bone age within 2 years indicates the child is in puberty. •
Isolated thelarche is characterised by normal growth, age-appropriate
skeletal maturation, pre-pubertal uterus and ovaries and isolated FSH
elevation with pre-pubertal LH level. • PPP is either an isolated breast
development (precocious thelarche) or sexual hair appearance (precocious
adrenarche) without other signs of puberty occurring before the age of 8
years in girls and 9 years in boys. PPP is usually benign and
non-progressive. Onset younger than 3 years is frequently associated
with regression over 1–3 years; later onset usually progresses slowly as
PP. • In precocious thelarche, the nipple is characteristically pale,
immature, thin and transparent. In PP the nipple is mature and prominent
with dark areolas indicating high circulating oestrogen. • PP may have
adverse effects on social behaviour and psychological development. Early
growth spurt causes rapid bone maturation, resulting in early epiphyseal
fusion and short stature. • Low-dose radiation of the brain may induce
PP in girls; high-dose radiation may induce PP in both sexes. •
Hypothyroidism can cause PP; children are, however, short and the growth
velocity is decreased. • Growth acceleration and advanced bone age
(wrist X-ray) favour true PP against PPP.

Red Flags • In any child with PP, careful search of the skin is
essential: café-au-lait maculae with smooth borders suggest NF-1; larger
café-au-lait patches with irregular outlines are consistent with the
McCune–Albright syndrome (polyostotic fibrous dysplasia of bone, and
ovarian cysts). • Be aware that children with hypothalamic lesion may
present with diabetes insipidus (polydipsia, polyuria), hyperthermia,
obesity or loss of weight, or inappropriate crying or laughter. • PP may
put girls at risk of sexual abuse and psychological trauma from teasing
and bullying. • A child with precocious thelarche or adrenarche still
needs careful evaluation, as these cannot often be easily and definitely
differentiated from true PP. • Full investigation, including imaging of
the CNS and abdomen, should be carried out for all children with PP who
have progressive signs of puberty, are younger than 8 years, with
neurological signs or if the diagnosis is uncertain. • Hypothalamic
hamartoma (ectopic tissue secreting pulse GnRH) is the most common
identifiable lesion causing PP. Examination of visual acuity, visual
fields and eye fundi is essential.

FURTHER READING Bajpal A, Menon PSN. Contemporary issues in precocious
puberty. Indian Endocrinol Metabol 2011;15​ (Suppl 3):S172–S179. Stephen
MD, Zage PE, Waguespack SG. Gonadotropin-dependent precocious puberty:
Neoplastic causes. Int J Pediatr Endocrinol 2011;2011(1):184502.

170

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

SHORT STATURE Clinical Overview Human growth is a complex physiological
process regulated by genetic, hormonal, nutritional, environmental and
psychological factors. About 80% of the variation in height is
determined genetically. Short stature is defined as height under 2.0
standard deviations below the mean or under the third percentile. The
three most common causes of short stature worldwide are familial,
constitutional delay and malnutrition. Familial short stature is seen in
normal children who have short parents, normal growth rate and bone age,
and enter puberty at the normal time. Their ultimate height is related
to their parental height. Children with constitutional delay have a
normal growth rate, but delayed onset of puberty and bone age. Because
of delayed bone age, they have more time to grow; they usually achieve a
normal adult height appropriate to the family pattern. Chronic diseases
causing short stature are mainly due to malnutrition.

Possible Diagnoses Infants

Children

Common Intrauterine growth retardation Skeletal abnormalities
Malnutrition Emotional deprivation

Familial short stature Constitutional delay Malnutrition Chronic disease
(e.g. chronic renal disease) Chromosomal (e.g. Turner’s syndrome)

Rare Idiopathic short stature Endocrine (e.g. hypothyroidism, poorly
controlled diabetes) Emotional deprivation Skeletal abnormality
(hypochondroplasia) Congenital heart diseases PP Chronic anaemia
Survivors of cancer Chronic diseases (coeliac disease, Crohn’s disease)

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance Familial Short Stature Normal height
increase &gt;5 cm/year Short parents Normal physical examination Normal
labor findings Delayed bone age

Constitutional Short Stature

Malnutrition

Chronic Disease

Chromosomal

Yes

Yes

Possible

Possible

No

Yes Yes Yes No

Possible Yes Yes Yes

Yes No No Yes

No No No Yes

No No No No

Recommended Investigations \*\*\* FBC: to exclude anemia \*\*\* Blood
glucose if growth hormone (GH) deficiency is suspected

Endocrine

171

\*\*\* Thyroid function test to confirm hypothyroidism **  GH check,
often done by checking the IGF-1 (insulin-like growth factor-1) **\*
Liver function tests, urea and electrolytes if liver or renal disease is
suspected \*\*\* Genetic studies, beginning with a karyotype for
Turner’s syndrome \*\*\* Chromosomal microarray, whole exome sequencing,
and hybridization testing \*\*\* Bone age to differentiate familial
short stature from constitutional delay \*\*\* Ultrasonography of the
heart, kidney and ovaries for Turner’s syndrome

Top Tips • The highest growth rate occurs in uterus (6 cm at 12 weeks’
gestation to 50 cm at term) and from birth to 1 year of life (23–28 cm);
decreasing aged 1–3 years (7.5–13 cm) and aged 3 years to puberty (5–7
cm); but increasing at puberty (8–9 cm in girls and 10–10.5 cm in boys).
• Children’s growth is like tree growth: they grow faster in spring and
summer; therefore, growth velocity should be measured for 1 year. • When
children present with short stature, doctors need to determine whether
they require extensive evaluation (e.g. hormonal, chromosomal) or
conservative monitoring for children with idiopathic short stature that
includes familial short stature and constitutional delay of growth. • GH
is a major counter-regulatory hormone to insulin; therefore, children
with GH deficiency may present with hypoglycaemia, particularly during
fasting or mild illness. • Measuring the height of both parents is
essential in evaluating a child with short stature. It helps diagnose
familial short stature and predict the ultimate height of the children.
• Short stature is often confused with growth failure. Short stature is
defined as height under the third percentile with normal annual growth
rate, while growth failure is defined as a growth rate of &lt;5 cm. •
Parents of children with short stature often seek medical services
because of a possible ‘endocrine’ cause; endocrine diseases are rare and
no more than 5% of causes.

Red Flags • When evaluating children with short stature, it is more
important how their growth rate has been rather than where the
percentile is on the chart. • Remember that the vast majority of short
children do not have GH deficiency, but because the deficiency is
potentially treatable, it must be considered carefully and excluded. •
Always consider Turner’s syndrome when pubertal delay is combined with
short stature. Children with Turner’s syndrome may have hypertension and
cardiovascular and renal malformation. • Children with chronic renal
disease, who are receiving dialysis or transplant, commonly have poor
linear growth, which is a high risk factor of poor school performance,
frequent hospitalisations and death. • Short stature can be more a
social than a clinical problem, being often a source of ridicule and
torment, teasing and bullying at school. Teaching patients how to
respond assertively and effectively to bullying and teasing to ensure
preserving self-esteem and confidence is essential.

FURTHER READING Jee YH, Baron J. The biology of stature. J Pediatr
2016;173:32–38. Ku E, Fine RN, Hsu CY et al. Height at first RRT and
mortality in children. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2016;11(5):832–839.

14

SKIN

ANAEMIA AND PALLOR Clinical Overview Normal skin colour is mostly
determined by the child’s constitutional degree of melanin content of
the skin resulting from hereditary and racial backgrounds. Pallor or
reduced or loss of the colour of skin or mucous membrane can be caused
by a variety of conditions including normal complexion, lack of exposure
to sunlight, anaemia, emotional stress, shock or chronic disease (Figure
14.1). Unless pallor is accompanied by clinical signs of anaemia (pallor
of the palmar, lip, mouth, conjunctiva and nail bed), it is of no great
significance. If these sites appear pale, haemoglobin (Hb) needs to be
checked to exclude anaemia. Anaemia is the most common nutritional
deficiency worldwide; around 2 billion people (around 30% of world’s
population) are anaemic. It is defined as an Hb level of less than 11
g/dL. A detailed account of anaemia is beyond the scope of this book.

FIGURE 14.1

Pallor in the hand of the patient on the right.

Possible Diagnoses Infants

Children

Common Feto-fetal transfusion Blood loss Haemolytic anaemia Infection
Physiological anaemia

Iron-deficiency anaemia (IDA) Thalassaemia Chronic disease (infection,
inflammation, tumour) Haemolytic anaemia (e.g. spherocytosis)
Haemoglobinopathy (e.g. sickle cell anaemia \[SCA\]) (Continued)

172

173

Skin Infants

Children

Rare Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) Osteopetrosis Red cell
aplasia

Lead poisoning Drugs Haemolytic uraemic syndrome Inflammatory bowel
disease (e.g. Crohn’s disease \[CD\]) Aplastic anaemia Hypothyroidism
Storage disease Megaloblastic anaemia (folic acid and vitamin B12
deficiency) Coeliac disease

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance

Splenomegaly Reticulocytosis Low ferritin Decreased mean cell volume
(MCV), mean corpuscular haemoglobin (MCH) Jaundice

IDA

Thalassaemia

Chronic Disease

Haemolytic Anemia

Haemoglobinopathy

Possible No Yes Yes

Yes Yes No Yes

No No Possible Possible

Yes Yes No No

Yes Yes No No

No

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Recommended Investigations *** Full blood count (FBC): Hb &lt;11 g/dL
is anaemia; MCV&lt;70 fL) and MCH&lt;26pg: microcytic hypochromic
anaemia *** Serum ferritin low in IDA \*\*\* Liver function test (LFT):
hyperbilirubinaemia suggestive of acute or chronic haemolysis \*\*\*
Reticulocyte count: high in haemolytic anaemia and in response to iron
treatment \*\*\* Vitamin B12 and folate (MCV &gt;90) to exclude causes
of megaloblastic anaemia \*\*\* Hb-electrophoresis: HbS in SCA; high
level of HbF to confirm thalassaemia \*\* Bone marrow examination is
required to exclude other disorders such as aplastic anaemia \*\* Serum
iron and iron binding capacity

Top Tips • High Hb and RBCs in neonates are due to active erythropoiesis
in response to low arterial oxygen saturation (AOS) during foetal life.
This erythropoiesis ceases abruptly with the rise of AOS at birth. Low
erythropoiesis continues for 6–10 weeks, causing a low Hb of 9–11 g/dL
in full-term (physiological anaemia of infancy) and 7–9 g/dL in
premature infants. This is the best stimulus for erythropoiesis and
should not be suppressed by blood transfusion. • By far the most common
cause of anaemia is nutritional iron deficiency, which can be easily
diagnosed by low MCV, MCH, and ferritin level. IDA is associated with
suppressed immune and cognitive functions, slower growth, and poor motor
and mental development.

174

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

• It can be difficult to exclude thalassaemia minor from IDA; both have
low MCV and MCH. Ferritin can differentiate (normal or high in
thalassaemia). Remember that IDA can co-exist with thalassaemia;
therefore, HbA 2 &gt;3.4% is diagnostic of a thalassaemia trait. •
Treatment with oral iron should be given to all children with Hb &lt;11
g/dL for 4–6 weeks. Hb needs to be checked to ensure recovery of the
anaemia.

Red Flags • Ignoring the need to investigate even mild anaemia is a
mistake; its presence may indicate a serious underlying disorder. •
Anaemia with low MCV/MCH should not be treated with iron before
thalassaemia is excluded. • In districts or localities with a high rate
of socio-economic deprivation, IDA is common, exerting a negative impact
on a child’s development. School-age children with IDA may have impaired
concentration and activity which affect learning. Screening for anaemia
is important. • Be aware that children with Crohn’s disease may present
with anaemia alone; ask whether there have been abdominal pain and
weight loss (these form the three features of this disease). • Adding
tonics, vitamins or trace metals to iron therapy is of no scientific
value; therefore, parents should be educated about this point. • Iron
preparations are an important cause of accidental overdose. Parents
should keep the medicine away from children, and should be told about
common side effects of iron.

FURTHER READING World Health Organization. Micronutrient deficiencies.
www.who.int//nutrition/en

175

Skin

BLISTERS (VESICLES AND BULLAE) Clinical Overview Blister is the lay
terminology for both vesicle (Figure 14.2) and bulla (Figure 14.3).
While a vesicle is a fluid-filled raised cavity less than 1 cm in
diameter, a bulla is greater than 1 cm in diameter. Vesicles may occur
on the mucosa of the mouth; it is however unusual to see them intact
because there is so much friction and trauma from eating and moving the
tongue. Blister eruption can be caused by infection such as varicella,
bullous impetigo, herpes simplex or hereditary blistering disorders such
as epidermolysis bullosa. Other causes include external factors such as
sunburn and contact dermatitis, or immunemediated cutaneous diseases
such as dermatitis herpetiformis, bullous pemphigoid and pemphigus.

FIGURE 14.2

Vesicles.

FIGURE 14.3

Bullae.

Possible Diagnoses Infants

Children

Common Erythema toxicum neonatorum (ETN) Staphylococcal scalded skin
syndrome Herpes simplex virus Herpetic gingivostomatitis Sucking
blisters Rare Scabies Epidermolysis bullosa Epidermolytic hyperkeratosis
Incontinentia pigmenti (first phase of the disease) Toxic epidermal
necrolysis (Lyell syndrome) Neonatal pemphigus vulgaris Bullous
Mastocytosis Congenital syphilis Bullous pemphigoid of infancy

Chickenpox Urticaria Atopic dermatitis (AD) Erythema multiforme Herpetic
gingivostomatitis

Scabies Eczema herpeticum Hand-foot-mouth disease Porphyria
Stevens-Johnson syndrome Drugs (e.g. naproxen) Naproxen-induced
pseudo-porphyria Contact dermatitis Dermatitis herpetiformis (DH)
Bullous impetigo Pemphigus vulgaris Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)

176

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance

Bullae formation With itching Mucosal involvement Fever Chronic form

Varicella

Urticaria

No Yes Yes Yes No

Yes Yes Possible Possible Yes

AD No Yes No No Yes

Erythema Multiforme

Herpetic Gingivostomatitis

Possible Possible Yes Possible No

No No Yes Yes No

Recommended Investigations \*\* Blood for autoimmune antibodies and
screening tests for coeliac disease **  Culture of swabs from the
lesions of infected bullous impetigo to identify the infecting bacteria
**  Biopsy of the lesions may be indicated for diagnosis of pemphigus
or dermatitis herpetiformis \*\* PCR of vesicular fluid for the
diagnosis of viral infections

Top Tips • Note that the vesicles situated superficially are flaccid and
rupture easily (e.g. bullous impetigo), whereas those arising from
deeper layers are more tense. • The Nikolsky sign (gentle rubbing
produces similar skin lesions) is a useful test. This is positive in
conditions like pemphigus or dermatitis herpetiformis (autoimmune
blister diseases). • ETN occurs in 15%–20% of neonates on the second day
of life and regresses in 5–14 days. It is an inflammatory reaction of
the skin characterised by papulo-vesicular and sterile pustules. •
Bullae at birth may be the first manifestation of epidermolysis bullosa.
Bullae-caused staphylococci are usually not present at birth, and the
bullae fluid appears infected in contrast to the clear uninfected fluid
in epidermolysis bullosa. • Hand-foot-mouth disease is a benign, common
infection caused by the A16 strain of Coxsackie virus and arises usually
first on the soft palate and tongue, followed by cutaneous lesions 1–2
days later. • DH is an IgA-mediated chronic bullous disease
characterised by intense itching and burning sensation. It is associated
with coeliac disease, and both respond to a gluten-free diet. • In
contrast to adults, childhood herpes zoster is often not associated with
localised pain or postherpetic neuralgia. Immunocompromised children may
have severe zoster reaction. • In an anaemic patient, a Mentzer index
\[MCV/RBC (millions)\] &lt;13 makes thalassaemia more likely that iron
deficiency anaemia.

Red Flags • Incising or puncturing bulla should not be performed as this
may induce infection. • Eczema herpeticum is a serious infection caused
by herpes simplex virus, which is invading eczematous lesions. It can
lead to death through dissemination of the virus to the brain and other
organs or from secondary staphylococcal or streptococcal infection. •
Herpes simplex and varicella can become disseminated in
immunocompromised patients. The child should be admitted and given
appropriate treatment of intravenous acyclovir.

Skin

177

• Herpes zoster (shingles) is relatively benign except when it affects
the ophthalmic division. Protection of the affected eye is essential. •
Scabies is a parasitic infestation caused by mites, with typical
pruritic burrows found on the web spaces of the fingers. It is often
misdiagnosed as eczema, prolonging the patient’s suffering. • Naproxen,
a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug used as an inflammatory agent in
rheumatic diseases, may cause an eruption characterised by erythema,
vesicles and shallow atrophic scars after sun exposure.

FURTHER READING Otten JV, Hashimoto T, Hertl M et al. Molecular
diagnosis in autoimmune skin blistering conditions. Curr Mol Med
2014;14(1):69–95.

178

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

CYANOSIS Clinical View Cyanosis is caused by the presence of an excess
of deoxygenated haemoglobin which is visible in the skin and mucous
membranes (central cyanosis). The great majority of cyanotic children
have either a pulmonary or a cardiac cause. Clinicians should be aware
of cyanosis occurring in healthy normal children, for example peripheral
cyanosis (acrocyanosis; Figure 14.4) noted in the vast majority of newly
born babies (causing the Apgar score to be 9 instead of a complete 10)
and in infants who are unwrapped and cold. Some healthy children may
have perioral cyanosis in response to cold, with or without shivering,
or following a rapid rise of fever. The causes of cardiac and pulmonary
cyanosis are large and beyond the scope of this section.

FIGURE 14.4

Cyanosis in a newborn.

Possible Diagnoses Infants

Children

Common Acrocyanosis at birth Respiratory distress syndrome (RDS)
Cyanotic CHD Pulmonary hypertension Breath-holding attacks

Breath-holding attacks (BHAs) Cardiac (failure, congenital heart disease
\[CHD\]) Fever (onset with shivering) Pulmonary (pneumonia, severe
asthma, pneumothorax) Raynaud’s phenomenon (Continued)

179

Skin Infants

Children

Rare Shock and sepsis Central hypoventilation Methaemoglobinaemia
(congenital) High Hb (polycythaemia) Neuromuscular diseases Pulmonary
arteriovenous malformation

Shock and sepsis (e.g. meningococcal infection) Neuromuscular disorders
with respiratory or cardiac insufficiency Methaemoglobinaemia (ingestion
of aniline dyes/nitrites) Foreign body Eisenmenger’s syndrome
Arnold-Chiari malformation

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance Transient Abolished by 100% oxygen
RDS signs (e.g. recession, grunting) Low O2 saturation Peripheral

BHA

Cardiac

Pulmonary

Fever

Raynaud’s

Yes No No No Possible

No No Possible Yes No

Possible Yes Yes Yes No

Yes No No Possible Possible

Yes No No No Yes

Recommended Investigations **   FBC to diagnose anaemia and
polycythaemia; white blood cell count raised in bacterial infection
***  Blood gases: with breathing 100% oxygen a rapid improvement of the
O2 saturation in pulmonary arterial blood ***  Chest X-ray to
differentiate pulmonary (e.g. infiltration) from cardiac causes (heart
enlargement) *   Electrocardiogram (ECG) may show ventricular
enlargement, arrhythmia or conduction defects *** Echocardiography to
provide the ultimate diagnosis \*\*\* Lung function tests, including
oxygen saturation by oximeter

Top Tips • The three main signs of CHD are cyanosis, congestive cardiac
failure and a heart murmur. The presence of central cyanosis in the
newborn without respiratory distress favours CHD. • Breathing 100%
oxygen will help to differentiate between right-to-left (oxygen
saturation remains low) and pulmonary or central hypoventilation. •
Increased Hb (polycythaemia) is more common in the newborns (e.g.
following twin-totwin transfusion, infants of diabetic mothers) than at
any age later in childhood. • Methaemoglobinaemia is either congenital
due to autosomal inheritance (deficiency of the enzyme cytochrome
reductase) or acquired by the ingestion of aniline dyes or nitrates. The
cardinal presentation is cyanosis in an otherwise healthy child, not in
distress and with normal physical examination. Cyanosis is reversed by
giving vitamin C. • Myocarditis is often caused by viral infection, and
parvovirus B19, human herpes virus and enteroviruses are the main
causes. Presentation is fever, myalgia, palpitation and syncope.

180

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

• Note that when a child manifests with blue lower extremities and pink
upper extremities (differential cyanosis), the child has right-to-left
shunt across a ductus arteriosus in the presence of coarctation or
interrupted aortic arch.

Red Flags • Mild cyanosis may escape detection if only the skin is
examined. It is best detected by examining the nail beds, lips, tongue
and mucous membranes. • A newborn with cyanosis suspected of CHD, should
have a prostaglandin infusion before arranging transportation to a
cardiac unit to prevent closure of the ductus arteriosus. •
Differentiating cyanotic BHA from epilepsy can be challenging: The onset
of BHA begins with crying, then apnoea, followed by facial cyanosis,
limping and possible seizure. In epileptic seizure, children first have
a seizure, then become blue. • A child who becomes suddenly breathless,
choking with or without cyanosis should be suspected of inhaling a
foreign body. Every clinician should be knowledgeable in the management
of eliminating it. • In an asthmatic child who becomes suddenly cyanosed
and breathless, pneumothorax must be ruled out.

FURTHER READING Catto AG, Zgaga L, Theodoratou E et al. An evaluation of
oxygen systems for treatment of childhood pneumonia. BMC Public Health
2011;11(Suppl 3):S28.

181

Skin

HYPER- AND HYPOPIGMENTED LESIONS Clinical Overview Pigmentary disorders
are a common presentation to family physicians, paediatricians and
dermatologists. Melanin (black) plays key roles in determining human
skin colour. Other pigmentary determinants include haemoglobin (red),
haemosiderin (brown) and carotene and bilirubin (yellow). In some cases,
pigmentation is an external sign of a serious underlying systemic
disorder. In general, multiple or generalised hyperpigmented lesions are
associated with more serious underlying diseases than those with
isolated lesions. Increased pigmentation (hyperpigmentation) may be
caused by increased melanin production or increased number of
melanocytes. It can be congenital (e.g. naevi, Mongolian (blue) spots;
Figure 14.5) or acquired (post-inflammatory pigmentation).
Hypopigmentation (decreases of pigmentation; Figure 14.6) or
depigmentation (loss of pigmentation) indicates a congenital (e.g.
albinism) or acquired (e.g. vitiligo) disorder in melanin production. In
some cases, e.g. tuberous sclerosis, both hyper- and hypopigmented
lesions co-exist.

FIGURE 14.5

Mongolian spots.

FIGURE 14.6

Hypopigmentation patches.

Possible Diagnoses Infants

Children

Common Carotenaemia Café-au-lait Mongolian spots Post-inflammatory
hyperpigmentation Systemic disease, e.g. tuberous sclerosis

Freckles (ephelides) Lentigines Café-au-lait Post-inflammatory
hyperpigmentation (PIH) Congenital melanocytic naevi (CMN)

Rare CMN Giant or small hairy naevus McCune–Albright syndrome Congenital
Addison’s disease Fanconi’s syndrome Generalised hereditary lentigines
Androgen excess

Halo naevi Melanoma Incontinentia pigmenti Peutz–Jeghers syndrome
LEOPARD syndrome LAMB syndrome Addison’s disease/adrenoleukodystrophy)
(Continued)

182

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter (Continued) Infants

Children Systemic diseases (e.g. tuberous sclerosis) McCune–Albright
syndrome Haemochromatosis Fanconi’s syndrome Androgen excess Drugs
(bleomycin, phenytoin, chlorpromazine) Acanthosis nigricans Morphea
(localised scleroderma) Pregnancy

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance Present at birth Sun-exposed area
Previous skin inflammation Positive family history Size &gt;1 cm

Freckles

Lentigines

Café-au-lait

PIH

CMN

No Yes No Yes No

Yes No No Yes Yes

Yes No No Yes Yes

No No Yes No Yes

Yes No No No Yes

Recommended Investigations No special investigations are usually
required in the vast majority of lesions. In some specific cases: \*\*
Biopsy of suspicious lesions (e.g. melanoma) with a few millimetres
surrounding of normal skin

Top Tips • Freckles are dark or brown macules, 2–3 mm in diameter, with
poorly defined margins that occur in sun-exposed areas: face, upper
back, arms and hands. Lentigines, in contrast to freckles, are larger in
size than freckles, unrelated to sun exposure and remain permanently.
Both are benign. • A single café-au-lait spot is a common finding
(5%–10%) in Caucasian children. Multiple (more than six) spots suggest
neurofibromatosis and are associated with other syndromes such as
McCune–Albright syndrome. • A single small (&lt;1.5 cm) CMN is common
and found in 1%–6% of neonates. It is benign and the risk of malignant
change in small and medium CMN is less than 1%. • LAMB syndrome is
characterised by facial lentigines in addition to atrial myxoma,
mucocutaneous myxoma and blue naevi. • LEOPARD syndrome consists of
lentigines, in association with ECG abnormalities, ocular hypertelorism,
pulmonary stenosis, abnormal genitalia, growth retardation and deafness.
• Peutz–Jeghers syndrome consists of hyperpigmented macules, in
association with gastrointestinal (GI) polyposis. • Mastocytosis is a
group of disorders that are characterised by an accumulation of mast
cells in the skin and other organs. Mastocytoma: a benign cutaneous
tumour occurring exclusively in infancy; urticaria pigmentosa: multiple
small salmon-coloured or red, cutaneous papules; systemic mastocytosis:
mast cell infiltrates in the skin, lymph nodes, liver, spleen, bone and
GI tract.

Skin

183

Red Flags • Carotenaemia – yellow discolouration of the infant skin by
the pigment carotene – is often mistaken as jaundice. It occurs in
healthy and thriving infants with normal, not jaundiced, sclera. •
Lifetime risk of malignant tumours arising from peripheral nerves in
neurofibromatosis is estimated to be 10%–15%. Close observation of
individuals with this disease is important. • Multiple café-au-lait
spots are associated with other syndromes (e.g. McCune–Albright
syndrome, LEOPARD syndrome, ataxia telangiectasia) which carry a high
risk of cancer development. • Change in the size of CMN occurs normally
in proportion to the child’s growth and should not be considered as a
sign of melanoma. Rapid growth, colour variation and ulceration are red
flags. • Multiple CMN surrounded by satellite naevi and large lesions
are considered a risk factor for melanoma and bone and CNS involvement.
Excessive exposure to sunlight increases the risk. • Children with
Peutz–Jeghers syndrome are at risk of GI malignancy; a close watch is
essential. • Acanthosis nigricans can suggest insulin resistance and
pre-diabetes.

184

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

HYPOPIGMENTATION Possible Diagnoses Infants

Children

Common Naevus depigmentosus Partial albinism (piebaldism) Naevus
anemicus Menkes’ syndrome

Vitiligo Post-inflammatory hypopigmentation Pityriasis alba Albinism
Post-varicella depigmentation

Rare Linear lichen sclerosus Waardenburg’s syndrome Chediak-Higashi
syndrome Ash leaf spots of tuberous sclerosis Infectious
hypopigmentation (e.g. tinea versicolour)

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance

Exposed area May present at birth Sharply demarcated Inherited Mainly on
trunk

Vitiligo

PIH

Pityriasis

Albinism

Post-Varicella Hypopigmentation

No No Yes Possible No

No No No No No

Yes No No No No

Yes Yes No Yes No

No No No No Yes

Recommended Investigations No special investigations are usually
required in the vast majority of lesions as the diagnosis is mostly
clinical. In some specific cases: \*\*  A skin scrape to differentiate
tinea versicolour from hypopigmented spots of pityriasis alba \*\*
Autoantibody screen may be carried out for vitiligo *** Wood’s light
examination to differentiate between depigmented and hypopigmented
lesions *** Cranial MRI or head CT in cases of possible tuberous
sclerosis

Top Tips • Albinism is a hypopigmented disorder involving the skin, hair
and iris. • Vitiligo is a depigmented disorder with an estimated
prevalence of 0.5%–1%. It is less frequently associated with autoimmune
and endocrine diseases compared to adults. It is, however, associated
with a high prevalence of psychological trauma and low self-esteem.

Skin

185

• About one-half of patients with vitiligo have their lesions during
childhood. Antibodies to melanocytes are frequently found, suggesting
autoimmune cause. A number of autoimmune diseases occur in the patients
and their relatives. • Pityriasis alba is a common condition
characterised by ill-defined hypopigmented spots, 1–2 cm in diameter, on
the face, arms and neck.

Red Flags • Be aware that the lack of protective melanin leads children
with albinism to high sun sensitivity which results in a high incidence
of basal and squamous cell carcinoma. Children with albinism must
therefore learn to protect themselves against sun exposure. • In
children with widespread albinism, visual impairment is the rule; the
more severe the hypopigmentation, the more severe is the visual acuity.
• Patients with vitiligo lesions have to be told that lesions may
progress to become universal. • Naevus anemicus (an area of localised
vasoconstriction) should not be mistaken as ash leaf hypopigmentation:
the former is blanchable, while the latter does not disappear on
blanching. • Acanthosis nigricans can suggest insulin resistance and
pre-diabetes.

FURTHER READING Gianfaldonis S, Wollina U, Tcchenev G et al. Vitiligo in
children: A review of conventional treatment. Open Access Maced J Med
Sci 2018;6(1):213–217. Price HN, Schaffer JV. Congenital melanocytic
nevi – When to worry and how to treat: Facts and controversies. Clin
Dermatol 2010;28(3):293–302. Russak JE, Dinulos JGH. Pigmented lesions
in children. Semin Plast Surg 2006;20(3):169–179.

186

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

ITCHING (PRURITIS) Clinical Overview Pruritis is the most common
cutaneous symptom in children characterised by a sensation that provokes
a desire to relieve it by scratching. It is either localized, where the
diagnosis is easy, or generalised due to systemic disease, where the
diagnosis is not obvious and often difficult to establish. In contrast
to adults, generalised pruritis due to systemic diseases (e.g. liver,
diabetes, renal) is rare in children, with the exception of dry skin,
which is very often inherited as an autosomal dominant. The most common
two causes of pruritis in children are dry skin and atopic dermatitis
(AD). The perianal area (nappy rash, AD, threadworms), vulva
(vulvovaginitis) and hair areas (pediculoses, scabies) are the common
localised sites of itching.

Possible Diagnoses Infants

Children

Common Atopic dermatitis Congenital cholestatic jaundice Too warm
environment Scabies Dry skin (xerosis) Rare Hyper IgE syndrome

Atopic dermatitis Food allergy Dry skin (xerosis) Scabies and
pediculoses, insects, worms (Figure 14.7) Urticaria (Figure 14.8)

Drugs (e.g. chlorpromazine) Cholestasis, hepatitis Endocrine (type 1
diabetes) Dermatitis herpetiformis Psychogenic Iron-deficiency anaemia
Polycythaemia Hyper IgE syndrome Chronic renal failure Lichen planus HIV
infection Pregnancy Sea bather’s eruption Certain malignancy (e.g.
Hodgkin’s lymphoma) Serum sickness

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance

Generalised Mainly on flexures Worse at night Cause obvious on skin
Positive family history

AD

Food Allergy

Dry Skin

Parasites

Urticaria

No Yes Yes Yes Yes

Yes No No No Possible

Yes No Possible Yes Yes

No No Yes Possible Possible

Yes No No Yes No

187

Skin

FIGURE 14.7 Itchy skin caused by scabies infestation.

FIGURE 14.8

Urticaria.

Recommended Investigations ** ** ** ** ** **

Fasting blood sugar, urinalysis and hemoglobin A1C to identify diabetes
mellitus FBC to confirm anaemia or eosinophilia in allergic conditions
Urea and electrolytes will diagnose chronic renal failure LFT: in
jaundiced patients Thyroid function tests (TFTs) to confirm
hypothyroidism or hyperthyroidism Scrapings from a burrow to diagnose
scabies

Top Tips • The vast majority of conditions causing pruritus are obvious;
the diagnosis is entirely clinical and based on the nature, distribution
and duration of the lesions. • Seborrhoeic dermatitis (SD) is often
difficult to differentiate from AD: pruritus is always present in AD, in
contrast to SD. • AD is the most common skin disease in paediatrics
(Figure 14.9). It is a chronic, relapsing, highly pruritic condition,
affecting 10%–20% of children, commonly associated with elevated IgE
levels and Staphylococcal aureus colonisation. • Pruritus is always
present in AD; if absent, the diagnosis is incorrect. There is no cure
or short cut to the long-term management aimed at relieving the
symptoms, including the itching.

Red Flags • Infants with restlessness, discomfort and excessive crying,
particularly at night, may well have pruritic systemic diseases such as
non-icteric cholestasis. • An AD which does not respond to conventional
treatment is very often due to Staphylococcal aureus or, less commonly,
fungal infections. Improvement should occur with antibiotic or
anti-fungal treatment even in the absence of clear signs of infection. •
Any skin dermatosis with intense pruritus, particularly when the child
is in bed, should alert the physician of the presence of scabies. •
Eczema herpeticum resulting from dissemination of herpes simplex virus
in AD can cause kerato-conjunctivitis and multi-organ involvement
leading to death. Prompt recognition and anti-viral treatment are
essential. Risk factors for this infection include severe AD and marked
IgE elevation.

188

FIGURE 14.9

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

Atopic dermatitis.

• Generalised pruritis could be the only symptom of obstructive jaundice
before the jaundice appears (e.g. primary biliary cirrhosis, drugs), and
that of chronic renal failure. • Any perianal or perineal pruritis at
night should alert the clinician to the presence of worms. Inspection of
the area by parents while the child is asleep often confirms the
diagnosis. • Children presenting with pruritis of the hair with pyoderma
and cervical and occipital lymphadenopathy should be regarded as having
pediculosis capitis until proved otherwise. Treatment is urgent. •
Investigation of pruritis is essential for children who are both without
physical findings and not responding to a short course of anti-pruritic
therapy.

FURTHER READING Lyons JJ, Milner JD, Stone KD. Atopic dermatitis in
children: Clinical features, pathophysiology and treatment. Immunol
Allergy Clin North Am 2015;35(1):161–183.

189

Skin

MACULES AND PATCHES Clinical Overview A macule, known in layman’s
language as a dot, is a circumscribed, flat area of change in skin
colour that is &lt;1 cm in diameter. It can be either hyperpigmented
(e.g. freckles) or hypopigmented (vitiligo). Patch is a larger area of
change in skin colour that is &gt;1 cm in diameter. The appearance of
macules or patches does not commonly remain static, and acute eruptions
can change rapidly to become elevated (maculopapular) or blistering
(maculovesicular). Therefore, initial rashes which may not be diagnosed
on day 1 may be diagnosed on the following day when the rash reaches its
ultimate evolution of appearance.

Possible Diagnoses Infants

Children

Common Mongolian spots Cutis marmorata Salmon patch Congenital
melanocytic naevus Nappy rash

Freckles Bruises Viral exanthem Drug eruption Café-au-lait spots
(neurofibromatosis type 1 \[NF1\])

Rare Port-wine stains Tuberous sclerosis (hypopigmented ash leaf)

Port-wine stains Cellulitis Albinism Tuberous sclerosis
Post-inflammatory hyper- or depigmentation Vitiligo Intertrigo
(inflammatory patch, e.g. in axilla) Pityriasis (alba, rubra pilaris)
Lentigo (benign hyperplasia of melanocytes) Tinea versicolour Erythema
migrans (Lyme disease; Figure 14.10) Rheumatic diseases Morphea
(localised scleroderma)

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance

Fever Blanch on pressure Present at birth Induced by sunlight Inherited

Freckles

Bruises

Viral Exanthem

Café-au-lait

Drug Eruption

No No No Yes Yes

No No No No No

Yes Yes No No No

No No Yes No Possible

Possible Possible No No No

190

FIGURE 14.10

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

Erythema migrans.

Recommended Investigations \*\*\* Wood’s lamp examination to enhance
visualization of hypopigmented lesions *   Skin scrapings may be
required for a suspected case of tinea versicolour *   Acute and
post-convalescent serum samples are occasionally required to confirm
rubella \*\*\* Brain imaging to assess for features of Sturge-Weber
syndrome or tuberous sclerosis

Top Tips • Because a specific dermatological diagnosis cannot always be
made, classification of a child’s skin disease into one of several
groups (e.g. as maculopapular, vesico-bullous) is a good start. •
Although blue spots are considered benign, widespread extra-sacral
lesions may persist into adulthood. They may co-exist with some inborn
errors of metabolism, e.g. gangliosidosis. • Salmon patch is by far the
most common vascular lesion in neonates – a midline or symmetrical pink
maculae over both eyelids. • Single or a couple of café-au-lait lesions,
1–3 cm in diameter occur in about 20% of all healthy children.
Café-au-lait spots, the hallmark of NF1, should be six or more
café-au-lait spots over 0.5 cm in diameter in pre-pubertal and 1.5 cm in
diameter in post-pubertal individuals. • Café-au-lait spots are one of
seven cardinal diagnostic criteria in NF1 that is associated with
numerous complications including tumours: neurofibroma, pheochromocytoma
and optic glioma. • Congenital melanocytic naevus (Figure 14.11) occurs
in 1%–6% of all neonates; melanomas may rarely develop from these naevi,
spontaneous regression may occur. • Pityriasis versicolour can be
hypopigmented (which needs to be differentiated from vitiligo if they
appear around the lips) and hyperpigmented.

Red Flags • Freckles around the mouth should be differentiated from
Peutz–Jeghers syndrome. The latter is an autosomal dominant inherited
syndrome with hyperpigmented macules on the lip and oral mucosa and is
associated with intestinal cancer.

191

Skin

FIGURE 14.11

Congenital melanocytic naevus.

FIGURE 14.12

Port-wine stains.

• The oral mucosa hyperpigmented lesions of Peutz–Jeghers syndrome are
also found in Addison’s disease and McCune–Albright syndrome.
Differentiation between these three diseases is essential. • Port-wine
naevus is always present at birth (Figure 14.12). When it is localised
to the trigeminal area of the face, the diagnosis is Sturge-Weber
syndrome. Be aware of glaucoma and seizure as complications. • Lesions
of pityriasis alba may be mistaken as vitiligo. The borders of the
lesions of pityriasis are not sharply demarcated as in vitiligo.
Patients and parents of pityriasis can be reassured that complete
restoration of normal skin colour will occur. • Although patches of
bruises over the shins are almost universal in toddlers due to frequent
falls, bruises on the arm, back, abdomen, thighs and genitalia are
suspicious for child abuse.

FURTHER READING Boyd KP, Korf BR, Theos A. Neurofibromatosis type 1. J
Am Acad Dermatol 2009;6(1):1–6.

192

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

NODULES AND TUMOURS Clinical Overview A nodule (lump or bump) is a
palpable solid or cystic raised lesion, &gt;1.0 cm in diameter, that
extends deeper than a papule: examples are small fibroma, erythema
nodosum and skin tumour. Larger nodules &gt;20 mm are classified as
tumours, whether benign or malignant. Nodules and tumours are
circumscribed, elevated lesions that are larger than papules, which
arise from deeper structures, thus displaying elevation as well as
depth. Tumours can arise from deeper as well as superficial structures
such as dermis or the epidermis.

Possible Diagnoses Infants

Children

Common Warts Subcutaneous fat necrosis Dermoid cyst Haemangioma
Infantile digital fibroma

Haemangioma (Figure 14.13) Dermoid cyst Nodulo-cystic acne (Figure
14.14) Erythema nodosum Fibroma

Rare Mastocytoma Neonatal lupus erythematosus Metastatic neuroblastoma
Reticulohistiocytosis (Hasimoto-Pritzker disease) Infantile
fibro-sarcoma

Keloid Discoid lupus erythematosus Nasal glioma Fibro-sarcoma, basal
cell carcinoma Cystic hygroma Epidermal naevus Mastocytoma
Subungual/periungual fibroma Lipoma Juvenile xanthogranuloma
Hidradenitis Rheumatoid nodule Malignant melanoma Erythema nodosum
Pyogenic granuloma Leishmaniasis, cutaneous Xanthoma Malignant melanoma
Sarcoidosis, cutaneous Juvenile xanthogranuloma Naevus (such as Spitz or
sebaceous naevus)

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance Present in neonate Skin coloured
Positive comedones Tenderness Regress

Fibroma

Dermoid Cyst

Nodulocystic Acne

Erythema Nodosum

Haemangioma

Possible Yes No No Possible

Yes Yes No No No

No No Yes Possible Yes

No No No Yes Yes

Yes No No No Yes

193

Skin

FIGURE 14.13

Haemangioma.

FIGURE 14.14

Nodulocystic acne.

Recommended Investigations ** ** ** ** \*\*

Urinalysis to detect proteinuria FBC: may reveal anaemia in case of
chronic inflammatory diseases Rheumatoid factor: positive with the
presence of rheumatoid nodules Kveim test: a useful test in case of
sarcoidosis Biopsy for obscure nodular lesion

Top Tips • Haemangiomas are found in about 10% of all children. They are
usually not present at birth, appear in the first few weeks of life,
enlarge during early infancy and regress aged 4–6 years. • Syndromes
associated with hemagiomas of the face, head or neck include PHACE
syndrome, an acronym denoting posterior fossa brain malformation,
haemangioma, arterial lesions, cardiac and eye abnormalities. • Erythema
nodosum is an important skin lesion characterised by subcutaneous,
tender nodules on the lower legs. The underlying cause may be
streptococcal infection, tuberculosis, sarcoidosis or drugs. •
Mastocytoma occurs in infancy as a reddish or orange nodule, rubbery in
consistency. A helpful diagnosis clue is Darier’s sign: rubbing the
lesion releases mast cell mediators, e.g. histamine, resulting in local
pruritis, erythema, oedema and blistering. • Keloid, in contrast to
hypertrophic scar, extends its growth beyond the limit of the original
scar and does not regress spontaneously. Both result from trauma to the
skin, e.g. surgical procedure.

Red Flags • Although a dermoid cyst is usually benign and most commonly
localised on the lateral third of the eyebrow, local growth may cause
proptosis, eyelid displacement and erosions on the bone. • Infantile
digital fibroma – a benign, firm, skin-coloured nodule at the lateral
surfaces of the distal phalanges – should not be mistaken for a
subungual/periungual fibroma found in tuberous sclerosis. • Any
congenital midline lesion, e.g. on the nasal bridge (dermoid cyst,
glioma or encephalocele), should be imaged because of the high incidence
of intracranial connection. If there

194

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

is a sinus opening with intermittent discharge, this is a pathognomonic
sign for intracranial connection. • Although basal cell carcinoma is
rare in children, it may result from basal cell naevus, radiotherapy for
other malignancies or excessive sun exposure. • Although paediatric
melanoma is rare (1%–4% of all melanomas), its incidence is increasing.
The traditional criteria ABCDE (asymmetry, border irregularity, colour
changes, diameter &gt;6 mm, evolution) is different in paediatrics:
amelanocytic, bleeding, colour uniformity and any size. •
Rhabdomyosarcoma – the most common childhood soft tissue sarcoma – is
often mistaken for haemangioma, both clinically and radiologically, due
to their vascular pattern. Any firm palpable lesion requires biopsy even
if the radiological signs support the diagnosis of haemangioma.

FURTHER READING Fogelson SK, Dohil MA. Papular and nodular skin lesions
in children. Semin Plast Surg 2006;20(3):180–191.

195

Skin

PAPULES AND PLAQUES Clinical Overview A papule – a little bump or pimple
in layman’s terms – is a small (&lt;1 cm), solid, circumscribed lesion
that is palpable above the skin surface. A plaque is a solid,
circumscribed lesion with its surface area greater than the elevation.
Plaques vary in size from 1 cm to a huge size covering part of the body.
Plaques can arise directly from the skin or through a coalescence of
papules. Some eruption has a combination of papules and plaques
(papulo-squamous eruption); pityriasis rosea is a typical eruption of
this combination.

Possible Diagnoses Infants

Children

Common Erythema toxicum neonatorum Milia Neonatal acne AD

Acne AD Warts Molluscum contagiosum Insect bites

Rare Histiocytosis syndrome (histiocytosis X) Mastocytosis

AD Scabies Hand-foot-mouth disease Herpes simplex cold sore Contact
dermatitis Papular gloves and socks syndrome Discoid lupus erythematosus
Papular urticaria Psoriasis Lichen planus Histiocytosis syndrome
(histiocytosis X) Fungal infection Keratosis pilaris HIV infection

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance Severe itching Associated pain
Exposed area Adolescence age Umbilicated centre

Acne

AD

Warts

Molluscum

Insect Bite

No No Yes Yes No

Yes No No No No

No No Yes No No

No No No Yes Yes

Possible Yes Yes No No

196

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

Recommended Investigations No special tests are usually required in
majority of lesions. Occasional skin lesion may require: \*\* Scraping
of scabies burrow \*\* Skin biopsy (occasionally may be required)

Top Tips • Milia – white papules of retention cysts, 1–2 mm in size –
are common in neonates (about 50%), seen on the nose and disappear
quickly. A pearly papule 1–2 mm on the midline of the palate, Ebstein
pearl, is a milium. • Acne may appear in newborns as self-limited
neonatal acne during 0–6 weeks of life, characterised by
papulo-vesicular eruption on the face, scalp and neck. Acne also appears
in pre-adolescents (7–12 years) and adolescents (12–18 years, affecting
about 85% of this age group). • AD presents during the first 6 months of
life as weeping papulo-vesicular eruption on the face and scalp,
spreading to the extensor surface of limbs, and to flexural parts. •
Pityriasis rosea is common: self-limited papulo-squamous dermatosis
localised mainly on the trunk and often preceded by solitary ‘herald
sign’. It presents with either papules or plaques. • Psoriasis is a
T-lymphocyte chronic inflammatory disease. About one-third of patients
are children. It may present in infancy as a nappy rash. Guttate
psoriasis is the most common presentation in older children,
characterised by sudden-onset small red or pink papules 1–10 mm in
diameter. • Lichen planus is not that uncommon in children. Lesions are
polygonal, flat-topped papules, 2–6 mm in diameter. Diagnosis can often
be confirmed by white papules on the buccal mucosa. • Mastocytosis –
accumulation of mast cells in the skin – can present either as
disseminated plaques or in solitary, nodular form (mastocytoma).

Red Flags • Erythema toxicum neonatorum, seen in about half of healthy
newborns, is often mistaken as staphylococcal pustules. A well-appearing
child and an asymptomatic rash exclude any infection. • Pre-adolescent
acne may precede other signs of puberty maturation. Investigation is
unnecessary unless there are signs of androgen excess, polycystic
ovarian syndrome or other systemic signs. • Although hand-foot-mouth
disease is usually benign, eruption caused by enterovirus type 71 can
spread rapidly causing neurological complications, e.g. encephalitis and
spondylitis. • Scabies is often mistaken as AD or impetigo leading to
Staphylococcus and Streptococcus bacterial infection and subsequently
glomerulonephritis and rheumatic fever. • Histiocytosis (formerly
histiocytosis X) can be mistaken as the more common SD if it affects the
scalp or AD. The disease has serious complications.

FURTHER READING Picardo M, Eichenfield LF, Tan J. Acne and rosacea.
Dermatol Ther 2017;7(Suppl 1):43–52. Siegfried EC, Herbert AA. Diagnosis
of atopic dermatitis: Mimics, overlaps, and complication. J Clin Med
2015;4(5):884–917.

197

Skin

PURPURA (PETECHIAE AND ECCHYMOSIS) Clinical Overview Purpura indicates
extravasation of blood into the skin or mucosal membranes. Lesions are
not raised. It may represent a benign condition or a serious underlying
disorder. Depending on their size, purpuric lesions are either petechiae
(pinpoint haemorrhages &lt;1 cm, usually &lt;2 mm, in diameter) or
ecchymoses (&gt;1 cm in diameter). In contrast to exanthem and
telangiectasia, purpura does not blanch on pressure. The normal
haemostatic mechanisms are complex but primarily are based on vascular
response: extravasation is followed by vasoconstriction and retraction
of blood vessels to decrease blood flow to the affected area, platelet
clot formation and activation of coagulation factors to form fibrin to
stabilise the clot. Therefore, purpura is due to vasculopathy,
thrombocytopathy, coagulopathy or a combination of these mechanisms. In
neonates, petechiae over the presenting part are common, particularly if
the delivery was traumatic. In late infancy and toddlers, bruises
frequently occur over bony prominences such as shins, knees and
forehead.

Possible Diagnoses Infants

Children

Common Infection (intrauterine or acquired) Hypoxia (DIC) Drugs Vitamin
K deficiency Congenital thrombocytopenic purpura Rare Child abuse
Thrombocytopenia, absent radius (TAR) Kasabach-Merritt syndrome
(thrombocytopenia with haemangioma) Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome
Histiocytosis Neonatal purpura fulminans

Henoch–Schönlein purpura (HSP) Immune thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP)
Physical abuse, trauma Infection (e.g. meningococcal septicaemia
\[MCS\]) Drugs

Bone marrow infiltration/failure (e.g. leukaemia) Vascular purpuras
(e.g. Von Willebrand’s disease) Hereditary coagulation defects
(haemophilia A and B) Ehlers-Danlos syndrome Liver disease Malabsorption
Haemolytic uraemic syndrome Scurvy Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome
Post-transfusion purpura

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance

Petechial Low platelets Fever Ill looking Preceded by upper respiratory
tract infection

HSP

ITP

Drugs

MCD

Trauma/ Child Abuse

No No No Possible Possible

Yes Yes No No Yes

Possible Possible No No No

Yes Possible Yes Yes Possible

No No No No No

198

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

Recommended Investigations \*\*\* Urine to screen for renal involvement
in HSP \*\*\* FBC: for thrombocytopenia, aplastic anaemia, leukocytosis
or infection \*\*\* Blood culture, U&E, Ca, blood glucose, FDP for ill
children with suspected septicaemia **  Cerebrospinal fluid in cases of
meningococcal septicaemia **  LFT and U&E for underlying renal and liver
disease **   Coagulation screen: bleeding and clotting time, partial
thromboplastin time (PTT) and prothrombin time (PT) **  Fibrin
degradation products for DIC \*\*\* Bone marrow examination is
occasionally indicated if the cause is not obvious

Top Tips • In a neonate with petechiae, management starts by taking the
mother’s previous medical history for presence of ITP, SLE, drugs and
infections during pregnancy. In purpura, careful history and thorough
examination are more important than extensive tests. • Baseline tests
for most purpuras should include FBC, peripheral blood smear, PT and
PTT. Additional tests should be performed when indicated by the history,
physical examination and baseline screening tests. • HSP (or IgA
vasculitis, the new term) is the most common vasculitis in children with
IgA immune deposits affecting small blood vessels. Renal involvement
occurs in 20%–40% of cases, determining long-term prognosis. •
Distribution of the purpura can offer important clues to the diagnosis:
in MCS, lesions are often on the neck and chest; in HSP, the lesions are
predominately on the shins, feet and buttocks; in ITP, there is bruising
and bleeding from the gums and mucous membranes. • Kasabach-Merritt
syndrome is characterised by vascular lesion (haemangioma),
thrombocytopenia and chronic consumption coagulopathy. Platelets are
consumed and destroyed within the haemangioma.

Red Flags • Multiple bruises of varying ages on the lower legs of young
children should not be mistaken for child abuse. These are common and of
no significance. Some petechial lesions seen on the face and neck can
follow severe coughing or vomiting. These may be mistaken as
septicaemia. • Infants up to the age of 3–4 months have physiological
prolongation of PTT, and abnormal PT and PTT only occur when coagulation
factor levels are &lt;40%. • Although the prognosis of HSP is usually
good, hypertension may develop in the recovery period and nephritis may
develop months or years after improvement of the HSP findings. •
Although ITP usually has a good prognosis, intracranial haemorrhage
occurs in &lt;0.5%, irrespective of the platelet count or treatment
given, e.g. corticosteroids or immunoglobulins. • Of all diseases with
purpura and those caused by sepsis, MCS is the most serious and needs
urgent management at the emergency room.

Skin

199

• Whenever there are unexplained bruises, non-accidental injury (NAI)
should always be suspected. Lesions are suspected when they are found in
areas of the body not normally subjected to injury (trunk, buttocks and
cheeks). Additional clues for NAI should be sought: inflicted cigarette
burns, retinal haemorrhages, intraoral injury and skeletal examination.
Radiological skeletal survey may be indicated. • Any purpura with pallor
is likely to be serious: bone marrow disease or haemolytic uraemic
syndrome could be the cause. Admit the patient and investigate.

FURTHER READING Eleftheriou D, Brogan PA. Therapeutic advances in the
treatment of vasculitis. Pediatr Rheumatol Online J 2016;14:26.

200

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

PUSTULES Clinical Overview The presence of pustular or vesico-pustular
skin lesions on a child’s skin is a cause of concern to the family. A
pustule is a superficial elevated lesion containing pus. It may
primarily result from a bacterial infection, usually staphylococcal, or
else when the content of a vesicle or bulla becomes secondarily
infected. Pustules are similar to vesicles, but the fluid they contain
is purulent exudate. The fluid is the product of accumulation of
leukocytes, microorganisms and cellular debris. It may occur either as a
primary (e.g. bullous impetigo) or secondary infection of another skin
condition (infected AD). When pustules arise at the opening of hair
follicles, the condition is termed folliculitis. Not all pustules have
infectious contents; for example, the contents of transient neonatal
pustulosis are sterile without microorganisms if cultured.

Possible Diagnoses Infants

Children

Common Erythema toxicum neonatorum Staphylococcal infection Benign
neonatal pustulosis Bullous impetigo Neonatal acne Rare Congenital
syphilis Congenital varicella Transient neonatal pustular melanosis

FIGURE 14.15

Infected AD Impetigo Acne Varicella (Figure 14.15) Staphylococcal skin
infection (e.g. furuncle, carbuncle)

Scabies Infected pediculoses Pyoderma gangrenosum Infantile
acropustulosis Relapse of neonatal herpes simplex virus infection
Staphylococcal pustulosis

Vesicles caused by varicella virus infection.

201

Skin

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance Infected AD

Impetigo

Acne

Varicella

Staphylococcal Skin Infection

No No Possible Yes No

No No No Possible Yes

Yes No No Possible No

No Yes Yes Yes No

No No Possible Possible No

Presence of comedones Mucosal involvement Fever Severe pruritis Perioral
involvement

Recommended Investigations No special investigations are usually
required in the vast majority of lesions as the diagnosis is mostly
clinical. In some specific cases: \*\* Swab from any pus or open
infected lesion to confirm the organism \*\* Polymerase chain reaction
analysis of pustular fluid for herpes simplex virus or varicella zoster
virus

Top Tips • Not all pustules indicate infection as some fluids inside are
sterile when cultured, e.g. benign neonatal pustulosis and transient
neonatal pustular melanosis. Both are self-limited dermatosis of unknown
aetiology and require no treatment. • Important bacterial causes of
pustules include bullous impetigo, folliculitis and ecthyma (deeper
infection than impetigo). Direct examination of the lesion scraping and
staining by Gram can identify the presence of Gram-positive bacteria
such as streptococci and staphylococci. • Papules and pustules around
the mouth (impetigo) are often due to staphylococcal or streptococcal
infection and should be treated with an antibiotic and not with topical
steroid.

Red Flags • Erythema toxicum neonatorum may be predominately pustular;
therefore, they must be differentiated from similar appearing lesions of
staphylococcal infection. • It is important to differentiate neonatal
varicella (NV) from congenital varicella syndrome (CVS). CVS occurs when
pregnant women contract varicella at 6–20 weeks of gestation, causing in
about 25% of neonates varicella embryopathy (such as limb interruption,
eye involvement, cicatricial scarring). NV occurs if the fetus is born
within a week of maternal varicella, resulting in a severe form of
varicella because of the lack of transplacental antibody to the virus. •
Early diagnosis of congenital syphilis may be difficult as babies may
present with subtle and non-specific symptoms including rhinitis,
generalised erythematous macules and papulo-pustular skin rash on the
palms and soles. An X-ray of the long bones showing periostitis is a
very important clue. • Herpes simplex virus infection or zoster in an
immunocompromised child indicates serious infection; urgent management
and appropriate treatment are required. • Clinicians should keep scabies
in mind in the differential diagnosis in a child who presents with
purpuric vesicular or pustular skin infection. The infection may affect
newborns with associated findings of irritability, poor feeding and
weight loss.

FURTHER READING Reginatto FP, Villa DD, Cestari TF. Benign skin disease
with pustules in the newborn. An Bras Dermatol 2016;91(2):124–134.

202

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

SWEATING, EXCESSIVE (HYPERHIDROSIS) Clinical Overview Physiological
sweating is a vital process for hypothalamic-controlled
thermoregulation; there is also emotional sweating regulated by the
limbic system. The human body has about 4 million sweat glands; 75% are
eccrine. Eccrine sweat glands, found all over the skin surface, cool the
body by evaporation of sweat. Apocrine sweat glands become active during
puberty and are mainly present in the axillae, anogenital skin and
mammary areas and produce viscous fluid to give the body a distinctive
odour. Excessive perspiration (hyperhidrosis) is due to overactive sweat
glands as a result of dysregulation of the neural sympathetic control of
the eccrine sweat glands. It can be generalised or localised to certain
parts of the body such as palms, axillae or soles. It can also be
primary, usually idiopathic, or secondary caused by an underlying
condition (e.g. hyperthyroidism). Excessive sweating is a common problem
and can be distressing; leading to embarrassment and avoidance of social
contact.

Possible Diagnoses Infants

Children

Common Warm environment Infection Drugs (antipyretics) Warm dressed
Excessive crying Rare Heart failure

Fever (phase of defervescence) Emotional/anxiety Drugs (e.g.
antipyretics, opioids, fluoxetine) Idiopathic Obesity

Endocrine (e.g. hyperthyroidism, pheochromocytoma) Rickets Spinal injury
Heart failure Hypoglycaemia Familial dysautonomia Malignancy (e.g.
lymphoma) Tuberculosis Withdrawal from narcotics, opiates Carcinoid
syndrome Chiari malformation with syringohydromyelia Chédiak-Higashi
syndrome

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance Generalised Profuse Ill looking
Associated pallor Related to movement

Fever

Emotion/Anxiety

Drugs

Idiopathic

Obesity

Yes Yes Yes No No

No Possible No Possible No

Yes Possible Possible No No

Yes Yes No No No

No Possible No No Yes

Skin

203

Recommended Investigations The vast majority of cases with hyperhidrosis
do not require any investigation as the cause is obvious. \*\*\* Blood
for TFTs, blood glucose to confirm, e.g. hyperthyroidism or
hypoglycaemia \*\*\* Hyperhidrosis severity scale: to monitor progress
after initiating treatment \*\*\* Brain and cervical MRI in cases of
suspected Chiari malformation

Top Tips • Palmar hyperhidrosis has a prevalence of up to 3% of the
population. In situations with fever, anxiety and stress there will be
worsening symptoms. • In children with acute hyperhidrosis, febrile
illness is by far the most common cause. • In cases of generalised
sweating, every effort should be made to find an underlying systemic
cause (e.g. hyperthyroidism, or hypoglycaemia) and treat it. • In
excessive sweating of the palms and soles, aluminum hydrochloride as a
20% solution is often helpful. • The low social esteem and social
isolation experienced by some patients with hyperhidrosis may be
compounded by the malodorous (bromhidrosis) and fetid odour caused by
decomposition of the sweat by bacteria and yeasts.

Red Flags • Be aware that in severe cases of sweating, the skin,
especially on the feet, may be macerated, fissured and scaling. This can
be mistakenly diagnosed as a primary infection such as fungal infection
rather than sweating as the primary cause. Increased hydration may
contribute to pyogenic infection and contact dermatitis. • Episodic
sweating, particularly if associated with abdominal symptoms (diarrhoea,
vomiting or pain), could have carcinoid syndrome or pheochromocytoma as
an underlying cause. • Sweating, with mild or without obvious fever, can
be due to tuberculosis, brucellosis or lymphoma. • Urgent attention
should be given to sweating occurring in sleep or associated with weight
loss.

FURTHER READING Romero FR, Haddad GR, Miot HA et al. Palmar
hyperhidrosis: Clinical, pathophysiological, diagnostic and therapeutic
aspects. An Bras Dermatol 2016;91(6):716–725.

204

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

TELANGIECTASIA Clinical Overview Telangiectasia indicates permanently
dilated superficial blood vessels in the skin or mucous membranes. One
or two telangiectases on the face (occasionally on the dorsa of the
hands) are common and trivial in children, and highly characteristic in
the vascular centre, from which radiates fine vessels that give the
appearance of a spider web. Unlike petechiae, which have a similar
appearance, they blanch with pressure and refill immediately after the
pressure is released. Other lesions may suggest serious systemic disease
such as ataxia telangiectasia (progressive cerebellar ataxia,
sinopulmonary infection and immunodeficiency) and hereditary
haemorrhagic telangiectasia (OslerWeber-Rendu disease), which is
autosomal dominant, characterised by arteriovenous malformation on the
skin, mucous membranes and internal organs such as brain, liver and
lungs.

Possible Diagnoses Infants

Children

Common Spider angioma (common telangiectasia) Oestrogen
treatment/pregnancy Liver disease Connective tissue diseases Hereditary
haemorrhagic telangiectasia (HHT) Rare Bloom syndrome Telangiectatic
haemangioma (reticular infantile haemangioma) Cutis marmorata
telangiectasia

Ataxia telangiectasia Hereditary benign telangiectasia Topical steroid
treatment Generalised essential telangiectasia CREST syndrome Congenital
cutis marmorata telangiectasia (CCMT) Idiopathic telangiectasia
Unilateral nevoid telangiectasia Chronic sun exposure

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance

Effect of oestrogen Associated with haemorrhage Inherited Visceral
involvement Benign

Spider Angioma

Oestrogen Treatment

Liver Disease

Connective Tissue Diseases

HHT

Yes No No No Yes

Yes No No No Yes

Yes Yes Possible Yes No

No No Possible Possible No

No Yes Yes Yes No

Skin

205

Recommended Investigations \*\*\* LFT to exclude liver disease
**  Urinalysis to exclude renal disease in collagen diseases (e.g. SLE)
**\* Immunoglobulin for telangiectasia is associated with immunoglobulin
deficiency **   Pregnancy test may be needed for widespread
telangiectasia and in case of spider angiomas **   Anti-nuclear
antibodies (ANAs), SLE double-strand test to exclude SLE for connective
diseases **  X-rays of legs may detect calcinosis in CREST (calcinosis,
Raynaud’s phenomenon, oesophageal dysmotility, sclerodactyly and
telangiectasia) syndrome **  Chest X-ray and liver ultrasound in cases
of suspected HHT

Top Tips • Spider angiomas (nevus araneus) are a common condition,
occurring in up to 15% of preschool-aged children and 45% of school-aged
children, usually on the cheeks and dorsa of the hands. They often
disappear in children and tend to persist in adults. • Some
telangiectasias are not obvious and need to be searched for, e.g. in the
bulbar conjunctive in ataxia telangiectasia and on the tongue and mucous
membranes in HHT. • The majority of cases with cutis marmorata are
trivial and occur commonly in neonates and infants. More pronounced and
persistent lesions during exercise, crying and changes of environmental
temperature could well be due to CCMT. This is also benign. •
Telangiectasia is part of CREST syndrome. Two or more of the features of
calcinosis, Raynaud’s phenomenon, oesophageal dysmotility, sclerodactyly
and telangiectasia establish the diagnosis. • Ataxia telangiectasia
manifests soon after children begin to walk with progressive cerebellar
ataxia, sinopulmonary symptoms and immunodeficiency. Children are
wheelchair bound usually aged 10–12 years. Telangiectasia usually
appears aged 3–6 years. • Bloom syndrome, inherited as an autosomal
recessive, mapped to chromosome 15, manifests in infancy as facial
erythema and telangiectasia in a butterfly distribution, similar to SLE,
after sun exposure.

Red Flags • The commonly appearing facial telangiectasia should not be
linked to any disease, e.g. liver disease, unless they are associated
with other symptoms suggestive of an underlying disease. • Although
Raynaud’s phenomenon is often benign and due to reactive peripheral
vasoconstriction, some children do develop later connective tissue
disease, particularly progressive systemic sclerosis and CREST syndrome.
Screening for auto-antibodies is useful. • Children with HHT experience
recurrent epistaxis and other haemorrhages (GI, mouth, and lungs) before
the typical appearance of telangiectasia, which may develop later.
Around 15%–20% of patients present with stroke. • Iron treatment in HHT
may precipitate epistaxis within hours. Reduced strength of the iron
tablets may not cause this phenomenon.

FURTHER READING Shovlin CL, Gilson C, Busbridge M et al. Can Iron
treatments aggravate epistaxis in some patients with hereditary
haemorrhagic telangiectasia? Laryngoscope 2016;126(11):2468–2474.

15

HAIR AND NAILS

ALOPECIA (HAIR LOSS) Clinical Overview Hair, derived from the epidermis,
develops around the third to fourth months of fetal life. At birth, the
number of hair follicles on the scalp (about a million) and on other
parts of the body (about 4 million) stabilises and no more follicles are
developed. The hair cycle consists of a growing phase of hair (anagen),
which lasts about 2–6 years and constitutes about 90% of the total hair,
and a resting phase (telogen), which lasts about 3 months. Normally,
30–150 hairs are shed daily from our scalp but hair re-grows
automatically so that the total number of hairs remains constant.
Alopecia may occur in patches (alopecia areata), on the entire scalp
(totalis) or over the entire body (universalis). Alopecia areata is the
most common type of alopecia, affecting 1%–2% of the world’s population.
It is a polygenic autoimmune disease that may be associated with other
autoimmune disorders, e.g. thyroid. The prognosis is good as hair
follicle bulbs are not destroyed. Some 80%–90% will experience re-growth
of their hair within a year. Alopecia may also be scarring (hair
follicle is irreversibly destroyed) or non-scarring which has the
potential for hair re-growth.

Possible Diagnoses Infants

Children

Common Normal (after lanugo hair shedding) Pressure alopecia Seborrhoeic
dermatitis Hidrotic ectodermal dysplasia Congenital alopecia (autosomal
recessive) Rare Syndrome (e.g. Menkes’ kinky hair) Child abuse
Hereditary vitamin D resistant rickets (HVDRR) Genetic alopecia

206

Alopecia areata (also totalis, universalis) Tinea capitis (TC)
Nutritional (e.g. iron, zinc deficiency) Drugs (e.g. cytotoxic,
anticoagulants, anticonvulsants) Trauma (traction alopecia, compulsive
pulling)

Child abuse Cicatricial alopecia (e.g. lichen planus) HVDRR Infection
(e.g. typhoid fever, syphilis) Short anagen syndrome Endocrine (e.g.
hypothyroidism, hypopituitarism) Genetic alopecia (autosomal recessive)
Syndromes (e.g. Hallermann-Streiff) Metabolic (e.g. homocystinuria)
Biotinidase deficiency Obsessive-compulsive disorder

207

Hair and Nails

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance Infancy Patchy Normal scalp Pruritis
Diagnosis by Wood’s light

Alopecia Areata

Tinea Capitis

Nutritional

Drugs

Trauma

No Yes Yes No No

Possible Yes No Yes Yes

Possible Possible Possible Possible No

Possible Possible Yes No No

Possible Yes Yes No No

Recommended Investigations \*\*\* Wood’s light confirms tinea infection
\*\*\* Thyroid function tests, zinc, iron, total protein and fractions
for nutritional causes \*\*\* Autoimmune screen (e.g. anti-nuclear
antibodies) for cases of alopecia areata \*\*  Investigations to
exclude possible metabolic causes (e.g. homocystinuria, biotinidase
deficiency)

Top Tips • Patchy alopecia on the occipital or temporal area in a baby
is common and is usually due to preferential sleeping on that area.
Sweating causes rubbing and worsens the condition. • When examining a
child with alopecia, find out whether it is diffuse or patchy,
inflammatory or non-inflammatory, scarring or non-scarring. This will
help with the differential diagnosis. • The diagnostic sign for alopecia
areata is ‘exclamation mark’ hairs, which are 1–2 mm in length, tapered
at the attached end and seen at the periphery of new bald patches. •
Nutritional causes of alopecia in developing countries are common, e.g.
marasmus (protein-calorie deficiency) or kwashiorkor (protein
deficiency). • Traction alopecia (trauma to hair follicle resulting from
traction by tight headbands, ponytails, rollers or curlers) is more
common in girls of African descent. • Trichotillomania is a behavioural
disorder characterised by patients recurrently pulling their own hair;
it may be part of an obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD). It is more
common in females and in adolescents. • Telogen effluvium (diffuse form
of hair loss) is an increased loss of hair than in normal hair shedding.
It may occur following stress or medications (e.g. childbirth, febrile
illness, surgery, severe weight loss, discontinuation of high dose of
steroids). Hair will re-grow in about 6 months.

Red Flags • Alopecia areata may affect eyebrows and eyelashes only. • Be
aware that alopecia may be caused by child abuse. The hairs are
typically broken at various lengths. Examine the skin carefully for
other signs of abuse such as bruises. • Trichotillomania and TC may be
mistaken for alopecia areata. Wood’s light is diagnostic for TC.

208

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

• For extensive alopecia areata with loss of eyebrows and lashes
occurring in early childhood, the prognosis is bad. In the absence of
these risk factors, it may take 1 year for the hair to re-grow. • Any
child with alopecia areata should be examined and investigated for other
autoimmune disorders such as vitiligo, coeliac disease, diabetes or
Addison’s disease. Good history is essential. • Trauma caused by
traction of hair follicles (from tight braids or ponytails) is common in
girls of school age. They should be encouraged to avoid devices that
cause trauma to hair. • In trichotillomania (compulsive pulling), there
is an impulse to pull at the hair. Many children suffer from emotional
stress and OCD, often requiring a psychiatric consultation. • As 30% of
patients with trichotillomania have the habit of swallowing the hair,
they may present with serious gastrointestinal complaints as the first
manifestation of the disease.

FURTHER READING Pratt CH, King LE, Messenger AG et al. Alopecia areata.
Nat Rev Dis Primers 2017;3:17011.

209

Hair and Nails

BODY HAIR, EXCESSIVE Clinical Overview Vellus hair is fine, soft and
non-pigmented, and covers most of the body before puberty. Terminal
hair, in contrast, is coarse, curly and pigmented. Pubertal androgens
promote the conversion from vellus to terminal hair. Hair growth in
excess of what is expected for age, sex and ethnicity is termed
hirsutism or hypertrichosis. While hypertrichosis indicates
non-androgenic excessive vellus hair growth in areas not usually hairy,
hirsutism is an androgen-dependent male pattern of terminal hair growth
in women. It may be localised or generalised, transient or permanent.
The most common cause of hypertrichosis or hirsutism is racial or
familial, which is frequent in people from the Mediterranean area and
the Indian subcontinent. It can be idiopathic or drug induced. In this
country, the most common cause of hirsutism is polycystic ovary syndrome
(PCOS). Important endocrine causes of hirsutism are congenital adrenal
hyperplasia (CAH) and Cushing’s syndrome.

Possible Diagnoses Infants

Children

Common Lanugo hair (racial) Drugs Endocrine (e.g. CAH) Congenital
pigmented naevus Congenital melanocyte naevus Rare Congenital
hypertrichosis Ambras’ syndrome Cornelia de Lange syndrome Fetal
hydantoin syndrome Localised

Racial and familial hypertrichosis or hirsutism Drugs (e.g. steroids,
phenytoin, cyclosporine, Minoxidil) Endocrine causes (e.g. Cushing’s
syndrome, CAH, adrenal tumour) PCOS Malnutrition, including anorexia
nervosa

Hyperprolactinaemia Pituitary adenoma Cornelia de Lange syndrome
Porphyria cutanea tarda Sertoli-Leydig cell tumour Granulosa-thecal cell
tumour Congenital terminal hypertrichosis with gingival hyperplasia
Idiopathic hirsutism Paraneoplastic syndrome

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance Positive family history Otherwise
healthy Infancy Recent onset Associated obesity

Racial/Familial

Drugs

Endocrine

PCOS

Malnutrition

Yes Yes No No

No Possible Possible Possible

No Possible Possible Possible

No No No Yes

No Possible No No

Recommended Investigations \*\*\* Urine for porphyria: 24-hour urine
collection for cortisol levels in CAH \*\*\* Urea and electrolytes: for
salt-losing CAH

210

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

*** Serum testosterone, dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate (DHEAS),
luteinising hormone, follicle-stimulating hormone: raised in PCOS and
tumour *** Serum 17-hydroxyprogesterone, DHEAS will confirm CAH \*\*\*
Serum prolactin to diagnose hyperprolactinaemia \*\*\* Thyroid function
tests \*\*\* Ultrasound scan for PCOS and CAH

Top Tips • Excessive hair growth is mostly racial and familial, so
investigation is often not required. • Although the term hirsutism is
mostly used in women, remember that hirsutism in prepubertal children
occurs equally in both sexes. It is an important sign of precocious
puberty. • The benign form of hirsutism is characterised by its pubertal
onset and slow progression over many years. PCOS is an example of this
and affects 5%–10% of women of reproductive age. • PCOS usually
manifests at puberty with menstrual disturbances, hirsutism, obesity
with insulin resistance and evidence of androgen excess (clinically
and/or biochemically). PCOS can be associated with the use of certain
medications, such as valproic acid. • Hirsutism, congenital or acquired,
is caused by excessive androgen. Patients often have deepening of the
voice, acne, irregular menstruation and a masculine body. •
Ultrasonography has an important role to play in this condition, e.g.
determining uterus and ovaries in masculine signs of CAH, identification
of multicystic ovaries (pearl necklace) in PCOS and detecting ovarian
and adrenal tumours. • Paraneoplastic syndrome is a rare disorder of a
wide variety of clinical pictures (e.g. myasthenic syndrome with lung
cancer) that occur at sites distant from the tumour.

Red Flags • Any acute and/or severe hirsutism requires investigation to
exclude serious underlying causes such as a tumour of the ovary or
adrenal cortex. • Be aware that, while high levels of testosterone with
normal DHEAS indicate that the ovaries are producing the androgens, high
levels of testosterone with high DHEAS indicate that the adrenal glands
are producing the androgen. • Hypertrichosis must be distinguished from
hirsutism causing virilisation; the latter is associated with acne,
increased muscle bulk, deepening of the voice and clitoromegaly. • In
CAH, steroidogenesis takes place in utero, so signs of masculinisation
(enlarged and fused clitoris, resembling a penis and labial fusion) are
present at birth. A mistaken diagnosis of cryptorchidism and hypospadias
is often made. • As patients with PCOS typically have metabolic
syndrome, blood pressure and testing for diabetes should not be missed.
• Be aware that female neonates exposed to high levels of androgen in
utero are at increased risk of developing PCOS in adolescence.

FURTHER READING Mihaildis J, Demesropian R, Taxel P et al. Endocrine
evaluation of hirsutism. Int J Women Dermatol 2017;3(1 Suppl):S6–S10.

211

Hair and Nails

ITCHY SCALP Clinical Overview Examination of the scalp is an important
part of the skin examination. Itchy scalp is a common and distressing
complaint in paediatrics that can be diagnostically and therapeutically
challenging. Itchy scalp is caused by a variety of conditions including
systemic (e.g. cholestatic liver disease, renal failure and diabetes),
inflammatory (e.g. seborrhoeic and atopic dermatitis, psoriasis, xerosis
and lichen planus), infectious (e.g. folliculitis, pediculosis, scabies
and insect bites), neoplastic (e.g. naevi and melanoma), autoimmune
disease related (e.g. dermatitis herpetiformis) and psychogenic. Of the
three types of lice, pediculus humanus capitis, corporis and pubis,
pediculosis capitis is the most common and important type. The diagnosis
is easy in the vast majority of cases and should be made by thorough
examination of the scalp before considering any treatment.

Possible Diagnoses Infants

Children

Common Excessive wrapping Scabies Pediculosis capitis Cholestasis Atopic
dermatitis

Pediculosis capitis Scabies Atopic dermatitis Dry skin (xerosis) Tinea
capitis

Rare Poor hygiene including neglect Impetigo Acute viral infection (e.g.
varicella) Drugs (e.g. iron, zinc)

Poor hygiene Contact dermatitis Inflammatory (e.g. psoriasis, acne
vulgaris) Infection (e.g. impetigo, folliculitis, varicella) Discoid
lupus Lichen simplex (neurogenic excoriation) Papular urticaria (insect
bites) Systemic (e.g. obstructive jaundice, diabetes) Drugs (e.g. iron
and zinc preparations, opioids) Autoimmune disease (e.g. dermatitis
herpetiformis)

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance Positive family history Skin lesions
elsewhere Normal hair Pustules Dermoscopy diagnostic

Pediculosis

Scabies

Atopic Dermatitis

Xerosis

Tinea Capitis

Possible No Yes Possible Yes

Possible Possible Yes Possible Yes

Yes Yes Yes Possible Possible

Yes Possible Yes No No

No No No Possible Yes

Recommended Investigations \*\* Wood’s light of the hair and scalp \*\*
Dermoscopic identification of mites from their burrows in scabies, naevi
\*\* Gram stain and culture from the follicular orifice to identify the
bacteria in folliculitis

212

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

Top Tips • In infants, warm wrapping and warm ambient temperature are
common causes of restlessness, sweating and scalp pruritis. • Remember
that poor hygiene is often the underlying cause of scalp itching, such
as pediculosis. Examination of the child may confirm other areas of his
or her body with poor hygiene. • Bullae, pustules and dermatitis of the
skin and scalp dominate in infants with scabies. In older children,
small papules and vesicles localised in the interdigital space and wrist
flexors are seen. • Wood’s lamp is a useful tool to have: blue-green
fluorescence is detectable in the hair shaft infected by fungal
infection. Tinea versicolor has golden fluorescence. A dark room is
needed. • As lice and ova (nits) are often hard to see in fair hair, the
best way to identify lice is to comb the hair properly with a louse
comb, preferably from the hairs behind the ears and back of the neck. •
A common cause of scalp pruritis is contact dermatitis due to the use of
soaps, shampoo and other hair products, particularly those that contain
alcohol. • Scalp naevi often cause anxiety for professionals and
parents. Dermoscopy is a non-invasive tool in the evaluation of these
naevi including melanoma. • In children with impaired immunity (e.g.
HIV) or receiving immunosuppressive drugs (e.g. steroids), widespread
and serious scabies rash with thick scaling may occur (Norwegian
scabies). The mites are able to multiply into thousands. The nails
become thickened and dystrophic.

Red Flags • Although pruritic patchy alopecia is often caused by
alopecia areata or tinea capitis, discoid lupus erythematosus and
secondary syphilis should be considered in the differential diagnosis. •
Fever, regional lymphadenopathy and widespread pustules caused by
bacterial infection often complicate pediculosis, tinea capitis and
scalp dermatitis. It is essential to search for the cause of this
inflammatory response. • Remember that some drugs (e.g. iron, zinc and
opioids) can directly cause itching; other drugs (e.g. chlorpromazine)
may indirectly cause itching by causing obstructive jaundice. • Melanoma
of the scalp is associated with worse prognosis compared to melanomas
located elsewhere on the body mainly because of the invisibility of
these lesions inside the scalp.

FURTHER READING Bin Saif GA, Ericson M, Yosipovitch G. The itchy scalp –
Searching for an explanation. Exp Dermatol 2011;20(12):959–968. Toheung
WJ, Bellet JS, Prose NS et al. Clinical and dermoscopic features of 88
scalp nevi in 30 children. Br J Dermatol 2011;165(1):137–143.

213

Hair and Nails

NAIL ABNORMALITIES Clinical Overview Abnormal nails may occur as a
result of generalised skin disease, skin disease confined to the nails,
systemic disease, fungal or bacterial infection or tumour. It is
important to distinguish between absent or small nails (anonychia)
occurring in epidermolysis bullosa, acrodermatitis enteropathica,
incontinentia pigmenti or nail-patella syndrome; abnormalities of the
nail shape (e.g. koilonychia or clubbing); abnormalities of the nail
surface; abnormalities of the nail colour (leukonychia, melanonychia or
yellow); and abnormalities of the nail attachment such as onycholysis.
Finger clubbing is an important sign for paediatricians and seen in
patients with cyanotic congenital heart, pulmonary (e.g. cystic
fibrosis) and inflammatory bowel diseases. Splinter haemorrhage is an
important clue to subacute bacterial endocarditis.

Possible Diagnoses Infants

Children

Common Koilonychia Paronychial inflammation Small or absent nails Trauma
Atopic dermatitis

Clubbing Koilonychia Paronychial inflammation Onycholysis (separation of
nail plate from the distal nail bed) Onychomycosis (fungal infection)

Rare Effect of drugs Pachyonychia congenita Nail-patella syndrome

Effect of drugs (e.g. chloroquine, bleomycin, vincristine) Psoriatic
nails Small or absent nails Ingrown nails Tumour (e.g. periungual
fibroma, subungual melanoma) Nail-patella syndrome Yellow nail syndrome
Longitudinal or transverse ridges Beau’s lines (caused by, e.g. arsenic
poisoning)

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance May be normal Inherited Abnormal nail
shape Part of systemic disease May be idiopathic

Clubbing

Koilonychia

Paronychial Inflammation

Onycholysis

Onychomycosis

Yes Possible Yes Yes Yes

Yes No Yes Yes Yes

No No Possible No No

No No No Yes Possible

No No Possible No No

Recommended Investigations \*\*\* FBC and serum ferritin in spoon-shaped
nails to exclude anaemia **  Throat swab for culture and ASO titre in
cases of acute psoriasis (guttate form) **  Wood’s light and microscopy
of culture in fungal infection

214

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

Top Tips • Koilonychia (spoon-shaped nails) can be normal during the
first 2 years of life and corrects itself later on. An important cause
is iron-deficiency anaemia (Plummer-Vinson syndrome). • Pachyonychia
congenita is an autosomal dominant trait associated with hypertrophic
nail dystrophy (pachyonychia); it often leads to paronychia, nail loss
and keratoderma. • Small or absent nails may occur in association with
nail-patella syndrome, in which the nail size is reduced by 30%–50%.
This is an autosomal dominant disease with small and unstable patella. •
Paronychial inflammation may occur after prolonged immersion with water,
which may occur with prolonged thumb or finger sucking. • Nail
involvement is a valuable diagnostic sign in psoriasis: pitting of the
nail plate, onycholysis and yellow-brown subungual discolouration of the
nails. • Children and adolescents with sub- or periungual fibromas
should be examined for additional signs of tuberous sclerosis.

Red Flags • In paediatrics, nail clubbing is the most important of all
nail abnormalities. It is often seen in children with cystic fibrosis,
inflammatory bowel diseases, cyanotic congenital heart diseases or
bronchiectasis, as well as in healthy people (idiopathic or inherited).
• Nail clubbing may be an early sign of AIDS. • Remember that the nail
plate is relatively pliable and thin during the first 1–2 years of life;
thus, spoon-shaped nails (koilonychia) at this age can be normal. Do not
mistake them as pathological. • Both flattening and concavity
(koilonychia) and white opacity of the nails (leukonychia) may harbour
an underlying disease such as anaemia. • Onycholysis is often due to
trauma or psoriasis. Thyroid disease should also be considered. •
Although subungual splinter haemorrhage (red-brown longitudinal lines
resulting from capillary leakage) may occur as a result of trauma or
psoriasis, they are a very important clue for subacute bacterial
endocarditis. The presence of cardiac murmur and fever clinches the
diagnosis.

FURTHER READING Singal A, Arora R. Nail as a window of systemic
diseases. Indian Dermatol Online J 2015;6(2):67–74.

16

BONES AND JOINTS

ARTHRALGIA (PAINFUL JOINT) Clinical Overview Painful joint (arthralgia)
is one of the most common complaints in children, indicating joint pain
not accompanied by obvious clinical signs of arthritis. It may be
generalised, involving multiple joints, mostly caused by a viral
infection, benign growing pain, joint hypermobility or minor trauma.
However, arthralgia may be a warning sign of serious underlying
diseases, including juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA) or
haematological malignancies. The best approach to a child with
arthralgia and normal examination is to perform careful initial
evaluation and inflammatory tests (such as white blood cell \[WBC\]
count, C-reactive protein \[CRP\]), followed by periodic monitoring for
changing in symptoms or physical findings. Steroid treatment should not
be used before final diagnosis is established and a malignancy excluded.
Parents are usually worried that a rapid diagnosis often cannot be made
and that clinicians are not telling them what is wrong with their child;
parental concern should be alleviated by informing them there is a
programme in place to monitor their child’s symptoms.

Possible Diagnoses Infants

Children

Common Acute viral infection Trauma Sickle-cell anaemia (SCA) Child
abuse Malignancy (e.g. leukaemia)

Acute viral infection Trauma Referred pain (knee arthralgia referred
from hip) Pre-arthritic (e.g. JIA) Malignancy (e.g. leukaemia)

Rare SCA Vasculitis (e.g. Henoch–Schönlein purpura) Child abuse
Avascular necrosis (e.g. slipped capital femoral epiphysis) Brucellosis
Fabry’s disease Inflammatory bowel disease (Crohn’s disease, colitis)
Rheumatic fever Sarcoidosis Drugs (e.g. carbimazole) Psychogenic
Trichinosis Hypermobility of connective tissue Immunodeficiency (e.g.
IgA deficiency) Wegener’s granulomatosis

215

216

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance

Mono-arthritis Associated fever Severe persistent pain Abnormal full
blood count (FBC), high CRP Diagnosis by imaging

Viral Infection

Trauma

Referred Pain

Pre-arthritic

Malignancy

No Yes No No

Yes No Possible No

Yes Possible No Possible

No Possible Possible Yes

Possible Possible Yes Yes

No

Possible

Possible

Possible

Possible

Recommended Investigations **   FBC with CRP: for bacterial diseases;
leucopenia in systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE); blood smear for
leukaemia **  CPK: elevated in dermatomyositis \*\*\* Haemoglobin
(Hb)-electrophoresis and peripheral film for SCA **  Kveim test for
suspected cases of sarcoidosis **\* X-ray: diagnostic for avascular
necrosis and excluding avascular necrosis \*\*  Bone scan is sometimes
required, e.g. suspected bone tumour

Top Tips • Every attempt should be made to ensure that there are no
signs of arthritis (red, hot and swollen joint) and to localise the
arthralgia. Once a joint is found responsible, diagnosis becomes easy. •
Arthralgia of the hip includes transient synovitis, Perthes’ disease or
slipped capital femoral epiphysis. The latter typically affects obese,
short children or those with a rapid growth spurt. • Painful knee may be
caused by traumatic synovitis, haemarthrosis, chondromalacia patella,
patellar subluxation or dislocation, synovial plicae, osteochondritis
dissecans or tumour. • Although children with avascular necrosis of the
tibia (Osgood-Schlatter syndrome) usually present with pain around the
anterior knee, examination often reveals swelling, tenderness and
prominence of the tibia tubercle. Healing is usually slow, taking 12–24
months. • Patellar subluxation is not uncommon, detected when the knee
is in full extension. Displacing the patella laterally results in the
patient grabbing the examiner’s hand (apprehension sign). • Painful
ankle may be due to sport injury (the most common cause) or referred
pain from avascular necrosis of the navicular bone (Köhler’s disease) or
the metatarsal head (Freiberg’s disease). • Although persistent
arthralgia without evidence of arthritis is uncommon in JIA, arthralgia
lasting several weeks may occur in the pre-arthritic stage of the
disease.

Bones and Joints

217

Red Flags • Knee joint pain may be a referred pain originating from a
diseased hip, such as transient synovitis. The knee joint is more
superficial than the hip and both share common nerve branches. •
Arthralgia due to a malignancy is typically disproportionally constant
and severe compared to the clinical findings. FBC may reveal low Hb and
platelets and diagnostic peripheral blood smear (for leukaemia). • Early
diagnosis of leukaemia is important. The use of steroids and
immunosuppressants without excluding haematological malignancy is likely
to mask and delay the diagnosis. • Remember that the diagnosis of
juvenile idiopathic arthritis should only be made if there is evidence
of arthritis (not arthralgia) persistent for more than 6 weeks and if
other diagnoses have been excluded.

FURTHER READING Yilmaz AE, Atalar H, Tag T et al. Knee joint pain may be
an indication for a hip joint problem in children: A case report. Malays
J Med Sci 2011;18(1):79–82. Zombori L, Kovacs G, Csoka M et al.
Rheumatic symptoms in childhood leukaemia and lymphoma – A tenyear
retrospective study. Pediatr Rheumatol Online J 2013;11:20.

218

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

ARTHRITIS (SWOLLEN JOINTS) Clinical Overview A detailed discussion on
arthritis, which comprises more than 100 different diseases, is beyond
the scope of this book. In short, arthritis may be monoarthritis,
oligoarthritis (less than five joints) or polyarthritis (five or more
joints). The main causes of oligoarthritis are trauma, septic arthritis,
JIA, reactive arthritis (ReA), Lyme disease, transient synovitis,
neoplastic arthritis and tuberculosis (TB) arthritis. Causes of
polyarthritis include JIA, rheumatic fever (RF), and vasculitis. JIA and
ReA are forms of autoimmune arthritis. ReA develops in response to an
infection, occurring 1–3 weeks elsewhere in the body, most commonly
following a viral or intestinal infection (Campylobacter, Salmonella or
Yersinia). JIA is classified into systemic onset (associated with high
remittent fever, rash, generalised lymphadenopathy, hepatosplenomegaly
and serositis), oligoarthritis and polyarthritis.

Possible Diagnoses Infants

Children

Common Post-infectious arthritis Septic arthritis Collagen disease JIA
Vasculitis

Post-infectious arthritis (reactive, synovitis) JIA Transient synovitis
(TS) Vasculitis (e.g. Henoch–Schönlein disease) Septic arthritis (SA)

Rare Familial Mediterranean fever Trauma Rheumatic fever Arthritis of
inflammatory bowel disease Lyme disease Neoplastic arthritis (leukaemia,
lymphoma) TB arthritis Psoriatic arthritis Behçet’s disease Reactive
arthritis

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance

Fever &gt;39.0°C Monoarthritis Persistent more than 6 weeks Associated
skin rash High anti-nuclear antibodies (ANAs)

Post-Infectious

JIA

Transient Synovitis

Vasculitis

SA

Possible

Possible

No

Possible

Yes

Possible No Possible Possible

Possible Yes Possible Possible

Yes No No No

No No Yes No

Yes No No No

Bones and Joints

219

Recommended Investigations ***  FBC: erythrocyte sedimentation rate
(ESR), WBC, and platelets raised in many rheumatic diseases, including
JIA *** Auto-antibodies, such as ANAs: positive in the majority of JIA
\*\*\* Rheumatoid factor, particularly in cases of polyarthritis JIA
***  Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is the only tool with the ability
to assess disease activity in the joints of JIA ***  Bone marrow
aspiration: positive in early stage of septic arthritis (SA) or
transient synovitis **  Bone scan, X-ray and MRI: diagnostic in
suspected cases of neoplastic arthritis **  Children with juvenile
arthritis should be referred for an ophthalmological evaluation

Top Tips • When a child presents with arthritis, the first question is
as follows: is it monoarthritis, oligoarthritis or polyarthritis? That
alone can restrict the differential diagnosis. • Transient synovitis is
diagnosed by a mild or no fever, history of a viral upper respiratory
tract infection and one hip being affected. Child appears well – limping
but still walking. WBC, CRP and ESR are usually normal; WBC count in the
joint fluid is &lt;50,000 cells/mm. It is self-limiting, usually lasting
1–3 weeks. • Systemic onset JIA can be diagnosed by the intermittent
high fever, often hectic, with a daily rise in the evening, then falling
to normal in the morning. The pattern may become double quotidian. Fever
is often associated with the occurrence of rash, lymphadenopathy and
splenomegaly. • SA, usually monoarthritis, is characterised by high
fever &gt;39.5°C, severe pain, restricted range of joint movement and
refusal to walk. It is defined as positive joint fluid culture for
bacteria and/or WBC count in the joint fluid of &gt;50,000 cells/mm,
mainly polymorphonuclear cells. • RF is characterised by migratory
arthritis, occurring 2–3 weeks following an untreated group A
ß-haemolytic streptococcal pharyngitis. Diagnosis is established by
Jones criteria. • ANAs are specific for nuclear constituents. These are
important arthritis tests: they are positive in nearly 100% in mixed
connective tissue disease, in over 95% in SLE and in about 50% in JIA.

Red Flags • Uveitis may be the initial presentation of JIA, particularly
with oligoarthritis. One-third of children develop unilateral (even
bilateral) loss of visual acuity. Regular eye checks are essential. •
Neoplastic arthritis should always be borne in mind. Diagnostic clues
include the presence of lymphadenopathy, hepatosplenomegaly, anaemia,
thrombocytopenia, or blast cells on the peripheral blood smear; pyrexia
is usually mild or absent. Bone marrow aspiration is diagnostic. •
Temporomandibular arthritis in JIA is challenging to evaluate because of
the absence of joint swelling. If untreated early, devastating effects
occur in its form and function. • In TB arthritis there is typically a
lack of response to treatment with antibiotics, nonsteroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs or intraocular steroids. Diagnosis is by
positive Mantoux test, with possible TB lesions in a chest X-ray and
synovial biopsy.

FURTHER READING Barut K, Adrovic A, Sahin S et al. Juvenile idiopathic
arthritis. Balkan Med J 2017;34(2):90–101. Stoll M, Kau CH, Waite PD et
al. Temporomandibular joint arthritis in juvenile idiopathic arthritis,
now what? Pediatr Rheumatol Online J 2018;16:32.

220

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

BACK PAIN Clinical Overview Back pain is a common complaint in adults,
but it often begins in children and adolescents. It is one of the most
reported health problems worldwide and a leading cause of disability,
activity limitation and school absences. Low back pain is the most
common type of back pain and is defined as pain limited to the region
between the lower margins of the 12th rib and the gluteal folds, with or
without referred leg pain. The majority of causes of back pain have an
underlying musculoskeletal or biochemical origin, such as trauma, muscle
strain or infectious and inflammatory diseases. Acute onset of pain is
suggestive of trauma or infection, while insidious onset may suggest
inflammatory or neoplastic aetiology. Localised back pain may suggest
stress fracture, while non-localised pain is often secondary to muscular
or inflammatory cause. Pyelonephritis is an important cause of back
pain.

Possible Diagnoses Infants

Children

Common Trauma Infection (e.g. pyogenic, TB)
Spondylolysis/spondylolisthesis Neuropathic Neoplasms Scheuermann’s
disease Rare Sacroiliitis Ankylosing spondylitis

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance Acute onset Fever Burning, pins and
needles High WBC, CRP Diagnostic MRI

Trauma

Infection

Spondylolysis

Neuropathic

Neoplasms

Yes No No No Possible

Yes Yes No Yes Possible

No No No No Yes

Possible No Yes No Yes

No Possible Possible Possible Yes

Recommended Investigations \*\*\* FBC, with ESR and/or CRP for
inflammatory spinal diseases \*\*\* Rheumatoid factor, HLA-B27 in
suspected cases of ankylosing spondylitis ***  MRI is the only tool
with the ability to assess disease activity in the joints of those with
JIA ***  Children with suspected spinal cord lesions should undergo
spine MRI with and without contrast

Bones and Joints

221

Top Tips • Neuropathic back pain refers to pain arising from injury or
disease directly affecting the nerve roots that innervate the spine and
legs. Cardinal symptoms include spontaneous pain (e.g. shooting or
electric shock-like), abnormal response to non-painful stimuli (e.g.
light touch), abnormal thermal sensation (burning or ice-cold) and
pricking pins and needles sensation. • Spondylolysis is a unilateral
fracture and spondylolisthesis is a bilateral fracture of the pars
inter-articularis. Both may occur as congenital spinal abnormality or
commonly resulting from back hyperextension following athletic injury
(football, gymnastics or swimming) with anterior displacement of the
vertebral body on X-ray. • Scheuermann’s disease is characterised by
increasing thoracic or thoraco-lumbar kyphosis with tightness of the
hamstrings and iliopsoas muscles. Diagnosis is a spinal X-ray showing
anterior wedging greater than five degrees of three or more consecutive
vertebrae.

Red Flags • A schoolbag that exceeds 10% of body weight can lead to back
pain and later becomes chronic. • Back pain in association with fever
and focal tenderness raises the possibility of serious pathology. •
Persistent and localised back pain that is worse at night may suggest
either a benign cause (e.g. osteoid osteoma or bone cyst) or a malignant
neoplasm (e.g. Ewing’s sarcoma, lymphoma or neuroblastoma). • Be aware
of the high incidence of uveitis in suspected cases of ankylosing
spondylitis.

FURTHER READING Calvo-Munoz I, Gomez-Conesa A, Sanchez-Meca J.
Prevalence of low back pain in children and adolescents: A
meta-analysis. BMC Pediatr 2013;13:14. Taxter AJ, Chauvin NA, Weiss PF.
Diagnosis and treatment of low back pain in children and adolescents.
Phys Sportmed 2014;42(1):94–104.

222

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

MYALGIA (PAINFUL MUSCLES) Clinical Overview Acute muscle pain (myalgia)
is a common complaint occurring in association with minor trauma, muscle
overuse and viral infections. It is not due to systemic or local spread
of the microorganisms, but rather due to interleukin-1 effect, which
induces protein breakdown (proteolysis). Myalgia can be due to benign
causes, such as musculoskeletal injury (sprains, strains, contusions or
overuse) or musculoskeletal pain syndrome (MSPS), or to more serious
conditions, such as myopathies (e.g. dermatomyositis or polymyositis),
metabolic disorders (glycogen storage disease) or muscular dystrophies
(e.g. dystrophinopathies including Duchenne muscular dystrophy).
Occasionally, myalgia can be recurrent (e.g. familial Mediterranean
fever) or chronic (e.g. chronic musculoskeletal pain).

Possible Diagnoses Infants

Children

Common Birth injury (muscle pulling or fracture) Any febrile illness
Child abuse Trauma Connective tissue disease (CTD) Rare Metabolic (fatty
acids oxidation defect) Scurvy

Febrile illness (e.g. viral myositis) MSPS Familial Mediterranean fever
(FMF) CTD Chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS)

Child abuse Trauma Fibromyalgia Infections (e.g. influenza b, Lyme
disease, Dengue, brucellosis) Acute polyneuropathy Mitochondrial disease
Drugs (statins or carbimazole) Porphyria Bornholm disease Trichinosis
Polymyalgia rheumatica Cutaneous vasculitis Wegener’s granulomatosis
Glycogen storage disease

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance Diffuse Fever Associated fatigue
Mainly 1–3 years Abnormal WBC, CRP

Febrile illness

MSPS

FMF

CTD

CFS

Yes Yes Possible Yes Possible

No No Possible Possible No

Yes Yes Possible No Possible

Possible Possible Possible Possible Yes

Yes Possible Yes No No

Bones and Joints

223

Recommended Investigations \*\*\* Urine: proteinuria in SLE; urine for
porphyrins, porphyria and rhabdomyolysis \*\*\* FBC may be helpful in
showing leucopenia, thrombocytopenia and anaemia in SLE \*\*\* CRP (or
ESR) is helpful for bacterial infections, CTD, dermatomyositis and FMF
\*\*\* Auto-antibodies such as ANA are helpful in CTD ***  For
trichinosis, serological studies and muscle biopsy (showing larvae)
confirm the diagnosis *** Ultrasound scan and/or MRI is helpful in some
inflammatory conditions \*\*\*  Serological and microbiological studies
in children with suspected infection-related myalgia

Top Tips • Not all muscle diseases produce pain; muscle diseases not
associated with myalgia include muscular dystrophy and spinal muscular
atrophies. • Acute myositis usually follows recovery from a viral
illness. Children present with symmetrical leg pain and refusal to walk.
The condition is usually benign and self-limiting within a few days. •
Chronic musculoskeletal pain is usually caused by non-inflammatory
conditions such as joint hypermobility. Affected pre-pubertal children
recover more rapidly than post-pubertal. • Diagnostic criteria for FMF
are recurring episodes of fever; pain in the abdomen (peritonitis),
chest (pleuritis) or joints (arthritis); and muscles (myalgia). •
Clinicians should be aware that there are overlapping symptoms among
MSPS, fibromyalgia, CFS and reflex sympathetic dystrophy. • Fibromyalgia
is associated with widespread pain and stiffness in the muscles, sleep
disturbance, school absence and fatigue. The condition may need to be
differentiated from CFS.

Red Flags • In any child with unexplained muscle pain, child abuse
should be considered among the differential diagnoses. Skeletal survey
may be needed to confirm it. • Occasionally a case of acute viral
myositis may develop rhabdomyolysis requiring dialysis. • Acute viral
myositis is often mistaken for neurological illness such as
Guillain–Barré ­syndrome or autoimmune disease leading to unnecessary
investigation. • A child with acute muscular weakness affecting the limb
girdle muscles should be suspected of having dermatomyositis until
proven otherwise. A peri-orbital rash is an important clue. • Myalgia
can be the presenting symptom of some serious diseases including bone
tumours. • Although trichinosis is uncommon in children in this country,
it is common worldwide (e.g. USA, less common nowadays). Children
present with localised myalgia and fever. Eosinophilia is present in
blood. A clue is ingestion of raw or undercooked pork meat.

FURTHER READING Magee H, Goldman RD. Viral myositis in children. Can
Family Physician 2017;63(5):365–368.

224

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

PAINFUL ARM Clinical Overview In children, arm pain usually results from
musculoskeletal injuries (sprain, strain, contusion, dislocation and
fracture). In the absence of dislocation or fracture, a MSPS or
childhood fibromyalgia can be considered. Both are diagnoses of
exclusion. The pain may affect part of the arm, the whole upper arm or
the forearm, occurring suddenly or gradually, constantly or
intermittently and often associated with a burning or numbing sensation.
If there is a history suggestive of injury (e.g. sport activity), the
diagnosis is evident. A moderate to severe injury is likely to be
followed by an inflammatory response that manifests as pain, spasm,
reduced arm movement and redness and swelling. Less common causes of arm
pain include neurovascular, cardiovascular disorders and referred pain
from another area such as the neck, chest or abdomen.

Possible Diagnoses Infants

Children

Common Birth injury Pulled elbow (nursemaid’s elbow) Myalgia (e.g. viral
infection) Child abuse Infection (osteomyelitis) Rare Child abuse Bone
tumour Scurvy Arthritis

MSPS Dislocation, fracture (including nursemaid’s elbow) Myalgia (e.g.
viral infection) Tendonitis and tenosynovitis Arthritis

Child abuse CFS Fibromyalgia Complex regional pain syndrome Cervical
nerve root compression Malignancy (bone tumour) Osteomyelitis Neuritis
(neuropathy), compartment syndrome Scurvy Fabry’s disease (lysosomal
disease with neuropathy) Raynaud’s phenomenon

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance

Non-arthritic pain Usually mild Associated swelling/tender Fever Normal
laboratory WBC, CRP

MSPS

Dislocation/ Fracture

Myalgia

Tendonitis

Arthritis

Yes Possible Yes No Yes

No No Possible No Yes

Yes Yes No Possible Possible

Possible Possible Yes No Yes

No No Yes Yes No

Bones and Joints

225

Recommended Investigations \*\*\* High FBC and CRP will support
bacterial infection or arthritis **  Autoantibody screen is useful in
case of Raynaud’s phenomenon **\* X-ray of the arm to exclude fracture
or dislocation \*\*\* Spinal X-ray is indicated if spinal lesions are
suspected \*\*  Bone scan in case of suspected osteomyelitis or
malignancy

Top Tips • Pain in the elbow may be caused by nursemaid’s elbow (pulling
hard on the child’s hand or wrist). • MSPS is a diagnosis of exclusion.
Pain may be persistent, localised or diffuse, characteristically
increasing over time, and associated with muscle tenderness, allodynia
(pain resulting from stimulation such as light touch of the skin) and
incongruent effect (inappropriate effect with the situation, with common
associated anxiety and depression). If affects often pre- to adolescent
girls. • Childhood fibromyalgia is characterised by generalised
musculoskeletal pain at several sites (at least four), with typical
tenderness at several points, lasting more than 3 months. • Fibromyalgia
may be associated with irritable bowel syndrome (incidence around 50%),
migraine or tension headaches (incidence around 50%) or
temporomandibular joint dysfunction. • Fibromyalgia and complex regional
pain syndrome are variant manifestations of MSPS. Although symptoms
often overlap with MSPS, they tend to be prolonged and recurrent. •
Although growing pain affects the lower extremities more often than the
upper extremities, arms may be involved. Remember its criteria: pain is
episodic, typically nocturnal, nonarticular, with no daytime disability
and continues for months. • Compartment syndrome is rare in children,
affecting circulation and function due to increased pressure in a
confined space, causing severe pain to be felt with passive muscle
stretching.

Red Flags • The presence of paraesthesiae, such as numbness, suggests a
neurological condition, e.g. neuritis or nerve trapping. Beware that
children may interpret paraesthesiae and muscle weakness as pain.
Careful history taking and physical examination are essential. • The
possibility of child abuse, Munchausen’s syndrome by proxy and school
phobia should always be considered in the differential diagnosis for a
young child with unexplained pain. • In any child with a trauma,
peripheral pulses and capillary refill time must be checked. • Despite
the overlap of symptoms, MSPS, fibromyalgia and CFS must be
differentiated. MSPS and fibromyalgia are associated with pain; in CFS
the striking symptom is fatigue. • Beware that Raynaud’s phenomenon can
present with swelling and pain of the fingers and forearm. If this
phenomenon worsens over time, autoimmune diseases such as
dermatomyositis, systemic scleroderma or SLE could be the underlying
cause.

FURTHER READING Gmuca S, Sherry DD. Fibromyalgia: Treating pain in the
juvenile patient. Pediatr Drugs 2017;19(4):325–338.

226

Paediatric Symptom and Sign Sorter

PAINFUL LEG AND LIMPING Clinical Overview Pain in the leg is common and
caused by musculoskeletal disorders, mainly as a result of trauma,
developmental, infectious and rheumatological and neoplastical
disorders. Painful limping is the usual presentation. The majority of
musculoskeletal causes are benign, self-limiting and often trauma
related. To facilitate an easy approach, age-related disorders are
classified in three groups: infant-toddler group (1–3 years):
non-specific muscular pain, poor-fitting shoes, trauma, congenital hip
dislocation (CDH) (unnoticed at birth), transient synovitis, avascular
necrosis, septic arthritis, JIA, mild CP, or tumours. School-age group
(4–10 years): non-specific muscular pain, growing pain, Perthes’
disease. Adolescent age (11–15 years): osteochondritis, slipped capital
femoral epiphysis (SCFE), osteochondritis dissecans and idiopathic
adolescent knee pain syndrome. The key to an accurate diagnosis is
careful history taking, thorough physical and neurological examination
and appropriate radiological and laboratory investigations.

Possible Diagnoses Infants

Children

Common Congenital hip dislocation Fracture Child abuse Infection (e.g.
septic arthritis) Arthritis/arthralgia Rare Osteochondritis in syphilis
Congenital hip dislocation Scurvy

Trauma (minor muscle strains/sprains/overuse) Growing pain Transient
synovitis Avascular necrosis (e.g. Perthes’ disease, SCFE)
Arthralgia/arthritis

Septic arthritis Discoid meniscus Cerebral palsy (e.g. hemiplegia) Limb
length discrepancy (e.g. CDH) Malignancy (leukaemia \[acute
lymphoblastic leukemia, ALL\], osteoma) Duchenne muscular dystrophy
(DMD) Psychiatric diseases (e.g. conversion disorder) SCA Congenital hip
dislocation (unnoticed at birth) Drugs (steroids) Complex regional pain
syndrome Ankylosing spondylitis

Differential Diagnosis at a Glance

MS tenderness Fever Limping Nocturnal pain Diagnosis by X-ray

Trauma

Growing Pain

Transient Synovitis

Avascular Necrosis

Arthralgia/ Arthritis

Yes No Possible Possible No

No No No Yes No

Possible Possible Yes No No

Yes No Yes No Yes

Yes Possible Yes No No

Bones and Joints

227

Recommended Investigations \*\*\* FBC and CRP for infectious diseases
(e.g. osteomyelitis or arthritis) \*\*\* Rheumatoid factor, ANAs, human
leukocyte antigen B27 for rheumatological cases \*\*\* CPK, serum
transaminases for muscular diseases \*\*\* TFTs and growth hormone level
in pre-pubertal children with SCFE \*\*\* X-ray of the leg can diagnose
many disorders, e.g. tumour or avascular necrosis \*\*  MRI and bone
scan are indicated by the result of the X-ray

Top Tips • Before diagnosing a disease in a child with leg pain and
limping, examine the shoes for poor fit or any foreign body such as a
nail. These are common causes. • The history of growing pain is
diagnostic: non-articular pain occurring at night for at least 6 months
and normal physical examination. • Limping may be due to discrepancy of
the leg length: measurement of the leg is performed by a tape measure of
the distance between anterior iliac spine and the medial malleolus. •
CDH may pass unnoticed at birth and presentation is with limping. If CDH
is unilateral, the affected limb is shortened by at least 2 cm
(significant). If bilateral, gait resembles duck walk due to increased
lumbar lordosis. • In a child with preceding upper respiratory tract
infection who is afebrile with sudden limping, transient synovitis is
very likely. Laboratory and radiological investigations are usually
normal. • Although X-rays of the leg are often requested for suspected
cases of avascular necrosis (osteochondrosis), a more important reason
is to exclude other lesions such as tumour. • Long-term use of steroids
can cause osteoporosis, fractures and avascular necrosis.

Red Flags • Beware that children older than 10 years with Perthes’
disease will almost certainly develop degenerative arthritis later on. •
Any boy with a delayed walking age of 18 months and DMD should be
excluded by checking the serum CPK. Children present with repeated
stumbling and falls and difficulty climbing upstairs. • When the knee is
examined, patello-femoral crepitations may be elicited. This is common
in normal individuals and does not indicate a knee disease. • Remember
that imaging of the bone is normal in the early stages of Perthes’
disease; the ‘crescent sign’ in a frog lateral position is the earliest
possible radiological sign. • Many children with hip diseases present
with knee pain. Pain in Perthes’ disease typically manifests in the
groin and thigh, radiating to the knee. Examination of all joints is
essential. • In a young child with an unexplained pain, child abuse
should not be forgotten in the differential diagnosis. Examine the skin
carefully for relevant bruises; skeletal survey may be required. • SCFE
is the most common hip disorder in adolescence. If it occurs
pre-pubertally, an endocrine cause such as hypothyroidism or growth
hormone deficiency may be the underlying pathology. • In children with
ALL, more than 50% present with bone involvement with limping and pain
typically in the morning, mainly in the lower extremities.

FURTHER READING Santili C, Junior W, Golano EO et al. Limping in
children. Rev Bras Orthop 2009;44(4):290–294. Tragiannidis A, Vasileiou
E, Papageoiou M et al. Bone involvement at diagnosis as a predictive
factor in children with acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Hippokrata
2016;20(3):227–230.


